The Project Gutenberg EBook of Collectors' Items, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Collectors' Items
       Fifty Superb Recipes from Spice Islands

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 9, 2020 [EBook #62345]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTORS' ITEMS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                           Collectors’ Items
                         _Fifty Superb Recipes
                                 from_
                             SPICE ISLANDS®


                SPICE ISLANDS SPICE RACK—SEE BACK COVER




                    _From Our Recipe File to Yours_


From appetizers to desserts—it is our pleasure to share these choice
recipes with you. We hope that you will make them as they were developed
and tested—with the spices, herbs and seasonings of Spice Islands. You
will appreciate why from the moment you open a Spice Islands jar.

For you who love to improvise with flavors and vary your own favorite
recipes, an herb chart is included in this booklet. It is limited by
space, but we think you will find it a useful guide in seasoning with
herbs.

Remember—the purpose of an herb, like that of a spice, is to enhance,
not dominate, the flavor of the food. So be selective when you
experiment. Until the art of seasoning with herbs is mastered, use just
one or two at a time.

Be especially sparing with the spices and herbs of Spice Islands, for
they are exceptionally full-flavored. Only the finest of each species is
used, and they come to you from Spice Islands exquisitely cured and
radiantly fresh and fragrant.

SPICE ISLANDS HERBS are California grown on farms owned and operated by
Spice Islands Company. In this way, select strains can be cultivated
with a quality control impossible to duplicate. The fullest flavor of
these herbs is yours because of the extreme care in growing, curing, and
processing.

SPICE ISLANDS SPICES come from those faraway parts of the world where
the finest grow—cinnamon from Viet Nam, nutmeg from the Isles of Banda,
ginger from Jamaica, and pepper (such pepper!) from Java. Whatever it
is, the very best is in your Spice Islands jar.

SPICE ISLANDS WINE VINEGARS are produced from fine wines of California’s
Sonoma Valley, and have an incomparable bouquet and mellow tang. There
is red wine vinegar plain or flavored with garlic, tarragon, or
eschalot; white wine vinegar plain, flavored with basil, or a sprig
float of tarragon.

SPICE ISLANDS TEAS are gathered at the peak of the season from the best
gardens in Japan, Formosa, Indonesia, Ceylon, and India. There are
eleven delectable blends—any will add an epicurean touch.

If the good things of life are for you, then let Spice Islands work its
wonders in your cooking and enjoyment of good food.

  LITHO IN U.S.A.
                                                        © COPYRIGHT 1959
                                              “BY SPICE ISLANDS COMPANY”


“_Dill ’n’ Onion Dip_”

  ⅔ cup mayonnaise
  ⅔ cup sour cream
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Green Onion
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Dill Weed
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning

Mix together mayonnaise and sour cream. Add Shredded Green Onion,
Shredded Parsley, Dill Weed and Beau Monde Seasoning; mix well. Let
flavors blend for an hour. Makes about 1½ cups.


_Beau Monde Dip_

  6 oz. cream cheese
  3 tablespoons light cream
  2½ teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Thyme
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Marjoram
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Summer Savory
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley

Crush herbs and mix thoroughly with other ingredients. Serve with
crackers, chips, celery or carrot sticks.


_Sour Cream Olive Dip_

  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base
  1 tablespoon boiling water
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  1 cup sour cream (8-ounce carton)
  ½ cup minced ripe olives
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning

Combine Chicken Stock Base and boiling water; stir to dissolve. Add
Instant Minced Onions and Worcestershire sauce. Let stand about 10
minutes. Stir in sour cream, minced ripe olives and Beau Monde
Seasoning. Chill an hour or so for flavors to blend. Makes about 1½ cups
dip.


_Winter Relish_                                                (3½ Cups)

  2 cups finely shredded cabbage
  4 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Green Bell Peppers
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Red Bell Peppers
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  2 teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Celery Salt
  ¼ cup SPICE ISLANDS White Wine Vinegar
  2 tablespoons sugar
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Whole Mustard Seed

Combine cabbage, Green and Red Peppers, Onions, salt, and Celery Salt in
a bowl; chill. Mix Vinegar, sugar, and Mustard Seed; stir well and toss
lightly with vegetables just before serving.


_Hearty Vegetable Soup_                                     (6 Servings)

  1½ quarts water
  3 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base
  1 #2½ can tomatoes
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Green Bell Peppers
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI for Soup
  ½ cup sliced celery
  ½ cup thinly sliced carrots
  1 cup cubed potatoes
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  1 tablespoon salt
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley
  2 cups fresh, frozen, or canned vegetables: such as lima beans,
              turnips, green beans, peas, corn, spinach, etc.
  2 tablespoons raw rice

Combine water and Beef Stock Base. Bring to a boil and add tomatoes,
Instant Minced Onions, Bell Peppers, and Bouquet Garni for Soup. When
soup is again boiling, add celery, carrots, potatoes, Beau Monde, salt,
and Parsley. Simmer for about 30 minutes. Add remaining vegetables and
rice. Simmer until vegetables and rice are done, about 20 minutes.


_Tomato, Vegetable, Chicken Noodle Soups_

Dilute one 10½-oz. can of Condensed Soup with one can of water. Bring to
simmer. Add ⅛ teaspoon crushed SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI for Soup. Let
simmer for several minutes.


_Mushroom Vichyssoise_                                      (6 Servings)

  2 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  2 level tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base
              dissolved in 3½ cups hot water
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  1½ cups thinly sliced, pared potatoes
  1½ cups light cream

Melt butter; add Onions and cook over low heat 5 minutes. Stir Powdered
Mushrooms and Beau Monde into chicken stock. Add to Onions along with
potatoes. Simmer 25 to 30 minutes or until potatoes are done. Cool to
lukewarm. Blend in electric blender 20 seconds. Stir in cream, chill
thoroughly. Serve ice cold.


_Basil French Dressing_                                     (6 Servings)

  1 cup SPICE ISLANDS Sweet Basil Wine Vinegar
  1 cup olive oil
  2 tablespoons sugar
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Cracked Java Black Pepper
  ¾ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Mayonnaise Mustard

Blend dry ingredients separately, put in screw-top jar, add liquids and
shake well each time before using. Particularly good with tomato or any
green salad. Keep in cool place.


_Green Goddess Salad Dressing_                              (8 Servings)

The Green Goddess dressing originated some thirty years ago. It was
named for the play in which George Arliss was starring and was first
served at a testimonial dinner given him the opening night in San
Francisco. Delicately flavored, its smooth consistency causes this
dressing to fully coat each leaf in bowl.

  1 cup mayonnaise
  ½ cup heavy cream
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon Wine Vinegar
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Wine Vinegar
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Eschalot Wine Vinegar
  1 rounding tablespoon anchovy paste
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder

Add lemon juice to cream, then mix with other ingredients. Serve with
green salad. Superb on broccoli or asparagus in place of mayonnaise.


_Coleslaw with Sweet Dill Dressing_

  ⅓ cup sugar
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Celery Seed
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Cracked Java Black Pepper
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Dill Weed
  1 cup salad oil
  ¼ cup SPICE ISLANDS White Wine Vinegar

Mix together sugar, salt, Celery Seed, Pepper, and Dill Weed. Beat in
salad oil alternately with Vinegar with either electric mixer or rotary
beater.


                           To make coleslaw:

Pour boiling water over 4 cups finely shredded cabbage. Drain at once.
Dip in cold water. Drain thoroughly and chill. Toss with ⅓ cup Sweet
Dill Dressing.


_Poppy Seed Salad Dressing_                             (Makes 1¾ Pints)

  1 pint olive oil
  1¼ cups sugar
  2½ tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Hot Mustard
  3 tablespoons lemon juice
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¾ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  ¹/₁₆ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  2½ tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Poppy Seed
  ½ cup SPICE ISLANDS White Wine Vinegar

Blend all dry ingredients in a mixing bowl. Add lemon juice and Vinegar.
Thoroughly mix with electric mixer at medium speed—then add olive oil
slowly, 1 tablespoon at a time. After all the oil has been added, let
beat at high speed for 15 minutes.


_Parmesan Herb Dressing_                                  (Makes 1 Pint)

Tart with a lively tarragon flavor. Serve this on cooked, chilled
artichokes; or cauliflower, string beans, asparagus, or broccoli, hot or
cold.

  1 egg, beaten
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Paprika
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Cracked Java Black Pepper
  ¼ cup SPICE ISLANDS White Wine Tarragon Vinegar
  ¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese
  1 cup olive oil
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Salad Herbs

Blend egg, Beau Monde, salt, Garlic Powder, Onion Powder, Paprika,
Pepper, Vinegar, cheese. Add the oil, a little at a time, beating until
thoroughly blended after each addition, until all is used. Continue
beating until thick and very smooth. Stir in Salad Herbs.




When you need a tasty sauce or gravy, SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base
comes to your rescue. There are countless variations you can try.


_Brown Sauce_                                             (2 Cups Sauce)

Excellent with roast beef. Indispensable when there’s not enough
drippings to make gravy or to serve with some leftover slices when the
gravy’s all gone. Use it as the basis of countless other sauces—and the
classics such as Sauce Espagnole, Madeira Sauce, Ravigote, or Piquant
Sauce.

  2 tablespoons butter
  4 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base
  2 cups hot water
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper

Melt butter; stir in Arrowroot. Add Beef Stock Base to water and stir
into butter and Arrowroot. Cook over low heat, stirring constantly,
until thick and smooth. Add Pepper. Serve hot as a gravy, or use as a
basis of other sauces.


_Onion Gravy or Sauce_                                      (6 Servings)

A good sauce to serve with broiled hamburgers or liver; delicious, too,
on leftover pot roast or other cold meat.

  2 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  4 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base
  2 cups hot water
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper

Melt butter; add onions. Cook about 5 minutes or until Onions are
slightly yellow. Stir in Arrowroot. Add Beef Stock Base to water and add
to onions. Cook over low heat, stirring constantly, until thick and
smooth. Add Pepper. Serve hot.


_Spice Islands Barbecue Sauce_                            (Makes 1 Pint)

An outstanding California favorite—brings many compliments that will
inflate your ego as a chef. Serve hot with hamburgers, meat loaves,
spaghetti and meat balls. Serve cold as a relish with cold meats.

  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Oregano
  2¼ teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Paprika
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Chili Con Carne Seasoning Powder
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Cloves
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Cracked Java Black Pepper
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Whole Mustard Seed
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS OLD HICKORY Smoked Salt
  1″ piece SPICE ISLANDS Bay Leaf
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Wine Vinegar
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon Wine Vinegar
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Eschalot Wine Vinegar
  ¼ cup olive oil
  ½ cup water
  ¾ cup catsup
  2 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  2½ teaspoons brown sugar

Blend dry ingredients and add to the liquids. Bring to a boil, then
simmer 1 hr. over low heat.


_Tartar Sauce_                                              (8 Servings)

Familiar to everyone, but still one of the most generally popular of the
fish sauces.

  1 cup mayonnaise
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Wine Vinegar
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Parsley
  1 tablespoon chopped pickle
  1 tablespoon chopped green olives
  1 teaspoon capers

Mix all together and serve with fried or broiled fish.


_Beurre Aux Fines Herbes_

Broiled steaks, lamb chops, even the breakfast eggs are all the better
when cooked in herb butter.

  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fines Herbes
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  4 tablespoons butter

Cream butter and Beau Monde. Crush Fines Herbes and cream into mixture.
When stored, flavor becomes more pronounced.


_Butter, Nepal_

An interesting new butter for hot vegetables or seafood, seasoned with
the gourmet’s pepper—Nepal.

  ½ cup butter
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Lemon Peel
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon Wine Vinegar
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Nepal Pepper

Melt butter; add Lemon Peel, Beau Monde, Onion Powder, Tarragon Vinegar.
Crush Tarragon, add to butter. Stir well and let stand 15 to 20 minutes
for flavors to blend. Just before serving, heat but do not let butter
brown. Add Nepal Pepper. Serve as sauce for hot cooked artichokes,
broccoli, asparagus, broiled lobster or other seafood.


_Herb Dumplings_

Flavorsome, featherlight dumplings for meat stews, or chicken fricassee.

  2 cups prepared biscuit mix
  ¾ cup cold water
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Sage
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Marjoram
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Thyme
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Sweet Basil
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Parsley

Mix all together and drop by teaspoonfuls on top of boiling stew. Cover
pan tightly, and steam slowly for 12 minutes. No peeking—it will make
your dumplings soggy. Sufficient for 2 quarts of stew or 8 persons.


_Fricassee of Veal Mei Yen_                                 (4 Servings)

Veal is usually very flat, pallid in flavor. This recipe will give it
character and give you a completely new entree.

  1½ pounds Leg of Veal (cut into 2-inch chunks)
  3 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Summer Savory
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Cracked Java Black Pepper
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Oregano
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  3 tablespoons chopped celery leaves
  3 tablespoons bacon fat
  3 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot

Dredge veal in blend of Arrowroot and seasonings. Brown meat mixture in
hot fat, cover and cook slowly until meat is tender. If meat should
become dry, add ½ cup boiling water or meat stock.


_Spice Islands Baked Ham Sauce_

  1 cup brown sugar
  1½ tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Mayonnaise Mustard
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Cloves
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Allspice
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Cinnamon
  ½ cup SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon Red Wine Vinegar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 cups water
  1 cup seedless raisins
  2 tablespoons butter
  ¼ cup salad oil

Blend all dry ingredients and mix with liquids. Cook in double boiler
until raisins are plump.

Can be made and kept in refrigerator. Reheat as much at a time as you
wish to serve.

Excellent on fried ham.


_Meat Loaf_                                                 (6 Servings)

  1 cup fresh bread crumbs
  ¾ cup milk, tomato sauce, tomato juice, or diluted condensed tomato
              soup
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI for Beef
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Green Bell Peppers
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Horseradish
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Hot Mustard
  1 egg
  1½ pounds ground chuck

Place bread crumbs in large bowl. Heat milk or other liquid to
simmering, pour over crumbs. Crumble Bouquet Garni and stir into bread
crumb mixture along with Instant Minced Onions, Green Peppers,
Horseradish, Beau Monde, salt, and Mustard. Beat in egg. Add ground
chuck and mix thoroughly. Shape into loaf and place in flat roasting
pan. Bake in moderate oven (350° F.) for 1½ hours. Make gravy from pan
drippings, if desired.


_Macaroni Parmesan_

  ½ lb. macaroni
  ¼ cup butter
  ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS SPICE PARISIENNE
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper

Boil macaroni in salted water until tender. Drain. Rinse in boiling
water. Add butter, cheese, Parsley, Spice Parisienne, Beau Monde, salt,
Pepper. Toss until butter is melted and cheese and seasonings mixed
throughout. Serve with Italian Braised Beef. If desired, pack macaroni
into well buttered 1 quart ring mold. Set in 300° oven 15 to 20 min.
Unmold on a heated platter and fill with “Italian Braised Beef”
(Page 14).


_Casserole “Cochon”_                                        (6 Servings)

  1 lb. link pork sausage
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  3 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  1 can tomato paste
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Oregano, crushed
  ⅛ piece SPICE ISLANDS Bay Laurel Leaf
  1 cup water
  1 cup dry white wine
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ lb. macaroni
  1 cup grated sharp Cheddar cheese

Cut each link of sausage into 3 pieces. Fry slowly until well browned.
Pour off all but 2 or 3 tablespoons of drippings. Stir in Onions and
Garlic Powder. Cook until Onions are lightly browned. Add Powdered
Mushrooms, tomato paste, Oregano, Bay Leaf, water, wine; mix well. Add
Mei Yen, salt. Simmer 20 minutes. Meanwhile, cook macaroni in boiling
salted water until tender. Combine with sauce and turn into large flat
baking dish. Sprinkle with grated Cheddar cheese. Bake 25 minutes at
350° or until sauce is bubbling and cheese melted.


_Sauerbraten_                                               (6 Servings)

  4 to 5 lbs. beef roast, round, chuck, rump or sirloin tip
  1½ tablespoons salt
  3 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 3
              tablespoons water
  10 SPICE ISLANDS Whole Java Black Peppers, crushed
  1 SPICE ISLANDS Bay Leaf broken into 3 pieces
  3 SPICE ISLANDS Whole Cloves
  1 cup SPICE ISLANDS Red Wine Vinegar
  2 cups water
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  2 tablespoons sugar
  6 gingersnaps, crushed
  ½ cup dry red wine
  ½ cup sour cream

Have butcher cover roast with a thin layer of suet and tie securely;
place in a crock, glass bowl or unchipped granite or enamelware pan.
Combine salt, Onions, Pepper, Bay Leaf, Whole Cloves, Red Wine Vinegar
and water. Pour over meat. Let stand 1½ to 2 days, turning meat 2 or 3
times daily. Take meat out of liquid; dry. Brown meat on all sides in
heavy frying pan. Place meat in roasting pan. Make a sauce by adding
Arrowroot to drippings in frying pan. Strain the pickling liquid and
stir into frying pan. Cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly.
Add sugar, crushed gingersnaps, red wine and cook until creamy. Pour
sauce over meat. Cover and roast in 350° oven until meat is done, about
2 hours. Baste frequently with sauce; if sauce seems too thick, add
water. When meat is done, remove to platter. Stir sour cream into gravy.
Serve meat and gravy with Potato Pancakes.


_Spanish Rice_                                              (6 Servings)

An excellent casserole for a barbecue. SPICE ISLANDS Spaghetti Sauce
Seasoning is the “secret” ingredient.

  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Green Bell Peppers, crushed
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  3 tablespoons olive oil
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  1 #2½ can tomatoes
  1 cup grated American cheese
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Spaghetti Sauce Seasoning
  ¾ cup rice
  1 teaspoon salt

Cook Green Peppers, Onions in oil until tender. Add Spaghetti Seasoning,
Beau Monde, rice, tomatoes. Mix thoroughly. Heat to boiling, add salt,
pour into 1½-qt. casserole. Cover, bake 35 min. in 350° oven. Uncover,
sprinkle with cheese, return to oven until cheese is melted.


_Italian Braised Beef_                                      (6 Servings)

  2 lbs. beef stew meat, cut in l-inch cubes
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  2 tablespoons olive oil
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base dissolved in 1 cup water
  1 8-oz. can tomato sauce
  ¼ cup dry red wine
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Oregano, crushed
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Sweet Basil
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder

Combine Arrowroot, salt, Pepper, Garlic Powder. Roll meat cubes in
mixture. Brown in olive oil. Stir in Onions, Powdered Mushrooms. Add
bouillon, tomato sauce. Stir until sauce is thick and smooth and
Mushrooms dissolved. Add wine, Beau Monde, Oregano, Sweet Basil, Mei
Yen. Cover; simmer two hours until tender, stirring frequently. Add more
water if sauce becomes too thick. Serve with Macaroni Parmesan
(Page 12).


_Savory Beef Stew_                                          (4 Servings)

  2 pounds lean beef stew meat, cut into 1½-inch cubes
  3 tablespoons flour
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base dissolved in 1 cup boiling
              water
  ¼ cup dry red wine
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI for Beef
  2 tablespoons tomato paste
  1 4-ounce can sliced or button mushrooms
  6 small onions
  3-4 carrots
  1 cup frozen or fresh peas

Combine flour, Beau Monde, salt, Pepper, and Garlic Powder. Coat meat
with seasoned flour and brown in a small amount of drippings,
shortening, or oil in a heavy kettle or Dutch oven. Pour Beef Stock over
browned meat; add wine, Bouquet Garni for Beef, tomato paste, mushrooms,
and liquid. Cover and simmer slowly until meat is tender (2 to 3 hours).
Add carrots and onions; when almost tender, add peas and continue
cooking about 10 minutes or until peas are tender. Serve with steamed
rice, noodles, or mashed potatoes.




                        SPICE ISLANDS HERB CHART


Remember! Season lightly when experimenting—and just one or two herbs to
a dish. Just before using, pulverize herbs in palm of your hand.

            BASIL      BAY LEAVES  MARJORAM    OREGANO     DILL WEED   PEPPERMINT

 APPETIZERS TOMATO     TOMATO      LIVER PATE  GUACAMOLE   CHEESE DIPS FRUIT CUP
            JUICE      JUICE       STUFFED     TOMATO      SEAFOOD     MELON BALLS
            SEAFOOD    ASPIC       MUSHROOMS               SPREADS     CRANBERRY
            COCKTAIL               BUTTERS                 PICKLES     JUICE

 SOUPS      TOMATO     STOCK       SPINACH     TOMATO      BORSCHT     PEA
            CHOWDERS   BEAN        CLAM        BEAN        TOMATO
            SPINACH                BOUILLON    MINESTRONE  CHICKEN
            MINESTRONE             MOCK TURTLE
                                   ONION

 FISH       SHRIMPS    COURT       CREAMED     SHRIMP      HALIBUT     GARNISH
            BROILED    BOUILLON    CRAB        CLAMS       SHRIMPS     FOR
            FISH       POACHED:    CREAMED     LOBSTER     SOLE        BROILED
            FILET OF   HALIBUT,    TUNA                                SHRIMPS,
            SOLE       SALMON      CLAMS,                              PRAWNS
            MACKEREL               HALIBUT
                                   SALMON

 EGGS OR    SCRAMBLED              OMELETTE    HUEVOS      OMELETTE    CREAM
 CHEESE     EGGS                   AUX FINES   RANCHEROS   COTTAGE     CHEESE
            CREAM                  HERBES                  CHEESE
            CHEESE                 SCRAMBLED
            WELSH                  EGGS
            RAREBIT

 MEATS      LIVER      STEWS       POT ROAST   PORK        BEEF        LAMB
            LAMB       POT ROAST   PORK        SAUSAGE     SWEETBREADS VEAL
            SAUSAGE    SHISH KEBAB BEEF        LAMB        VEAL
                       TRIPE       VEAL        MEAT LOAF   LAMB

 POULTRY    VENISON    FRICASSEE   CREAMED     MARINADES   CHICKEN PIE
 AND GAME   DUCK       STEWS       CHICKEN     STUFFINGS   CREAMED
                                   STUFFINGS   PHEASANT    CHICKEN
                                   GOOSE       GUINEA HEN

 VEGETABLES EGGPLANT   BOILED      CARROTS     TOMATOES    CABBAGE     CARROTS
            SQUASH     POTATOES    ZUCCHINI    CABBAGE     BEETS       NEW
            TOMATOES   CARROTS     PEAS        LENTILS     BEANS       POTATOES
            ONIONS     STEWED      SPINACH     BROCCOLI    CELERY      SPINACH
                       TOMATOES                                        ZUCCHINI

 SALADS     TOMATO     ASPIC       CHICKEN     VEGETABLE   COLESLAW    FRUIT
            SEA FOOD   MARINADES   MIXED GREEN BEAN        CUCUMBER    COLESLAW
            CHICKEN    FOR: BEET,              TOMATO      POTATO      ORANGE
                       ONION                                           PEAR

 SAUCES     TOMATO     ALL         CREAM SAUCE SPAGHETTI   CREAM (FOR  MINT
            SPAGHETTI  MARINADES   BROWN SAUCE TOMATO      FISH)
            ORANGE     ESPAGNOLE   SOUR CREAM              TARTAR
            (FOR GAME) CHAMPAGNE
            BUTTER
            (FOR FISH)

 DESSERTS   FRUIT      CUSTARDS                                        FRUIT
 AND        COMPOTE    AND CREAMS                                      COMPOTE
 BEVERAGES                                                             FROSTINGS
                                                                       ICES
                                                                       TEA

            ROSEMARY   SAFFRON     SAGE        SAVORY      TARRAGON    THYME

 APPETIZERS FRUIT CUP              SHARP       VEGETABLE   TOMATO      TOMATO
                                   CHEESE      JUICE       JUICE       JUICE
                                   SPREADS     COCKTAIL    CHEESE      FISH
                                                           SPREADS     SPREADS
                                                           LIVER PATES COCKTAILS

 SOUPS      TURTLE     BOUILLA-    CHICKEN     LENTIL      CHICKEN     BORSCHT
            PEA        BAISSE      CHOWDERS    BEAN        MUSHROOM    GUMBO, PEA
            SPINACH    CHICKEN                 VEGETABLE   TOMATO      CLAM
            CHICKEN    TURKEY                              PEA         CHOWDER
                                                                       VEGETABLE

 FISH       SALMON     HALIBUT     HALIBUT     CRAB        BROILED     CREAMED
            HALIBUT    SOLE        SALMON      SALMON      FISH        TUNA
                                                           LOBSTER     SCALLOPS
                                                           THERMIDOR   CRAB
                                                                       SOLE

 EGGS OR    OMELETTE   CREAM       CHEDDAR     SCRAMBLED   ALL EGG     SHIRRED
 CHEESE     SCRAMBLED  CHEESE      COTTAGE     EGGS        DISHES      EGGS
            EGGS       SCRAMBLED               DEVILED     OMELETTE    COTTAGE
                       EGGS                    EGGS        AUX FINE    CHEESE
                                                           HERBES

 MEATS      LAMB       VEAL        STEWS       PORK        VEAL        MUTTON
            VEAL                   PORK        VEAL        SWEETBREADS MEAT LOAF
            RAGOUT                 SAUSAGE                 YORKSHIRE   VEAL
            BEEF STEW                                      PUDDING
            HAM LOAF

 POULTRY    PARTRIDGE  CHICKEN     GOOSE       CHICKEN     CHICKEN     STUFFINGS
 AND GAME   CAPON      RABBIT      TURKEY      STUFFINGS   SQUAB       VENISON
            DUCK                   RABBIT                  DUCK        FRICASSEE
            RABBIT                 STUFFINGS                           PHEASANT

 VEGETABLES PEAS       RISOTTO     LIMA BEANS  BEANS       SALSIFY     ONIONS
            SPINACH    SPANISH     EGGPLANT    RICE        CELERY ROOT CARROTS
            FRENCH     RICE        ONIONS      LENTILS     MUSHROOMS   BEETS
            FRIED      RICE        TOMATOES    SAUERKRAUT  BAKED
            POTATOES                                       POTATOES

 SALADS     FRUIT      SEA FOOD                MIXED GREEN MIXED GREEN BEETS
                       CHICKEN                 STRING BEAN CHICKEN     TOMATO
                                               POTATO      FRUIT       ASPICS
                                                           SEA FOOD

 SAUCES     CREAM      FISH SAUCE              HORSERADISH BEARNAISE   CREOLE
            SAUCE                              FISH SAUCES TARTARE     ESPAGNOLE
            BARBECUE                                       VERTE       HERB
            TOMATO                                         MUSTARD     BOUQUETS

 DESSERTS   FRUIT      CAKE        SAGE TEA    STEWED
 AND        COMPOTE    BUNS                    PEARS
 BEVERAGES  JELLY      FROSTINGS
            GIN PUNCH


_Braciuolini_                                               (6 Servings)

A classic Italian dish. Serve it with spaghetti tossed in butter, SPICE
ISLANDS Shredded Parsley, and grated Parmesan cheese.

  1½ pounds round steak, cut ¼ inch thick
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper
  1 teaspoon salt
  6 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Chips
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 cup water
  ½ cup dry white wine
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI for Beef

Cut steak into 6 pieces. Combine Mei Yen, Pepper, and salt. Sprinkle
onto pieces of steak. Sprinkle each piece of steak with 1 teaspoon of
Instant Minced Onions; divide Garlic Chips evenly and sprinkle onto each
piece of steak. Roll tightly and tie with string. Brown rolls in butter
in heavy frying pan. Add water and wine. Crush Bouquet Garni and
sprinkle over rolls. Cover tightly and simmer rolls 30 to 40 minutes or
until tender. If desired, thicken sauce with 1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS
Arrowroot mixed with 2 or 3 tablespoons cold water.




SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI for Soups and SPICE ISLANDS BOUQUET GARNI
for Beef are superb seasonings for hearty beef dishes and satisfying
soups. Each is a perfect blend of the “just right” herbs designed to
enhance and compliment the foods in which they are used.


_Speedy Mixed Bean Pot_                                     (8 Servings)

For this quickly-made hearty casserole, use whatever canned beans you
have on the shelf—baked beans, pork and beans, garbanzos, limas, pintos,
etc. Made from vegetarian-type beans, you can have a completely meatless
main dish with a good smoky flavor.

  3 one-pound cans beans such as vegetarian baked beans, limas, pintos,
              kidney beans, etc.
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  2 tablespoons salad oil
  ¼ cup chili sauce
  2 tablespoons molasses
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Hot Mustard
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS OLD HICKORY Smoked Salt

Empty beans into 2-quart casserole. Cook Onions in oil until tender but
not brown. Stir into beans along with chili sauce, molasses, Mustard and
Old Hickory Salt. Bake in a 350°F. oven for 40 to 50 minutes.


_Beef Stroganoff_                                           (6 Servings)

  1½ to 2 pounds sirloin steak
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  4 tablespoons butter
  3 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 3
              tablespoons water
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  1½ tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base dissolved in
              2 cups water
  ¼ cup dry white wine
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS SPICE PARISIENNE
  1 cup sour cream
  2 tablespoons sherry

Cut meat in 1-inch cubes. Combine Arrowroot, salt, Pepper, and Garlic
Powder. Roll meat in Arrowroot mixture; brown in butter. Add Onions and
Mushrooms, mix thoroughly. Pour in Chicken Seasoned Stock Base and white
wine. Season with Spice Parisienne. Cover and simmer 1 hour or until
meat is very tender. Stir occasionally. Just before serving stir in sour
cream and sherry.


_Lamb Curry_                                                (4 Servings)

This Lamb Curry is real party fare. Serve with steamed rice and a
variety of condiments such as chutney, chopped or sieved hard-cooked
eggs, chopped peanuts, raisins, flaked coconut, sliced bananas,
pineapple chunks, chopped crisp bacon, chopped green onions and sliced
tomatoes.

  1 fresh coconut
  1½ to 2 pounds lamb shoulder, cut in 1-inch cubes
  2½ cups boiling water
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  2 teaspoons salt
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Curry Powder
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Rosemary
  1 medium-size tart apple, peeled and diced
  1 medium-size tomato, peeled and diced
  1 tablespoon chopped SPICE ISLANDS Crystallized Ginger
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Lemon Peel
  1 cup sliced celery
  ½ cup evaporated milk
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot, mixed in 1 tablespoon cold water

Break coconut and save any liquid; grate coconut meat; pour 2 cups
boiling water over grated coconut and let stand for one hour, then
strain liquid through a double thickness cheese cloth (squeeze coconut
to extract all possible liquid). To strained liquid add liquid from
coconut, if any. Trim excess fat from meat. Render a piece of fat in a
heavy kettle or Dutch oven. Brown cubed meat in melted fat and season
with Mei Yen, salt and Curry Powder. Add Instant Onions, Garlic Powder,
½ cup boiling water, crushed Bouquet Garni, apple, tomato, Crystallized
Ginger and Lemon Peel. Cook slowly for 1 hour or until lamb is tender.
Add coconut liquid and sliced celery; cook until celery is barely
tender. Add Arrowroot and stir constantly until sauce is thickened. Just
before serving stir in evaporated milk.


_Old Hickory Hamburgers_                                    (4 Servings)

  1 pound ground beef
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Onion Powder
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS MSG
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS OLD HICKORY Smoked Salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper

Mix together ground beef, Onion Powder, MSG, Old Hickory Smoked Salt,
and Pepper. Let stand an hour or so for flavors to develop. Shape into
patties. Pan-broil, cook on grill, or barbecue. Serve hot.


_Saffron Veal Strips_                                       (6 Servings)

The subtle flavor of Saffron makes veal into a distinctive delicacy.
Measure Saffron with great care. Its flavor is very potent when too much
is used. If you should care for a stronger Saffron flavor, add the
merest speck at a time.

  2 pounds veal steak
  ¼ cup butter
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  ¹/₃₂ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Saffron
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Cracked Java Black Pepper
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Thyme, crushed
  2 cups rich milk
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot

Cut meat into strips about ½-inch wide. Remove bones and connective
tissue. Melt butter in heavy frying pan; add veal strips, brown lightly.
Combine Garlic Powder, Mei Yen, Saffron, Beau Monde, salt, and Pepper.
Sprinkle over veal, turn meat and stir until coated with seasonings. Add
Onions and Thyme, sprinkle over meat. Cover and cook over low heat until
veal is tender (about 45 minutes). Add milk. Moisten Arrowroot with a
little cold water and mix into meat. Cook, stirring constantly, until
sauce is thickened and smooth. Serve over buttered noodles or steamed
rice.


_Poultry Stuffing_

TO STUFF 4-POUND CHICKEN: Mix 3 cups crumbs from fresh bread, 1
tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Poultry Seasoning, 1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS
Instant Minced Onions soaked in 1 tablespoon water, 2 tablespoons melted
butter. Add no liquid or dressing will be soggy.

TO STUFF 15-POUND TURKEY: Mix 10 cups crumbs from fresh bread, 3
tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Poultry Seasoning, 4 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS
Instant Minced Onions soaked in 4 tablespoons water, ½ cup melted
butter. Add no liquid or dressing will be soggy.

Use above recipe to stuff veal, pork, lamb shoulder.

Rub pork and veal with Poultry Seasoning for extra flavor.


_Poulet Bercy_                                              (4 Servings)

  1 large broiler, quartered
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 1
              tablespoon water
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Thyme
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Sage
  3 tablespoons butter, melted
  ¼″ piece SPICE ISLANDS Bay Leaf
  ½ cup dry white wine
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base
  1 egg yolk, beaten
  1 cup light cream

Arrange chicken in flat pan. Mix butter, Onions, Garlic Powder,
Mushrooms. Cook gently 5 minutes. Add crushed Thyme, Tarragon, Parsley,
Sage, Bay Leaf, wine, Chicken Base. Pour over chicken. Marinate 1 hour.
Turn occasionally. Bake 30 minutes at 400°. Baste often. When done,
arrange on hot plates. Put egg, cream in pan, add sauce from chicken.
Simmer until thickened. Stir constantly. Pour on chicken.


_Creole Shrimp Gumbo_                                       (6 Servings)

If you prefer, use crab, lobster, oysters, or other seafood.

  2 tablespoons salad oil
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  2 cups hot water
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base
  4 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Garlic Powder
  4 SPICE ISLANDS Chili Pequins
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Green Bell Peppers
  ¼ cup chopped celery
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley
  1 1-inch piece SPICE ISLANDS Bay Leaf
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Thyme, crushed
  3 cups cooked or canned tomatoes
  1½ to 2 pounds cooked, cleaned shrimp
  1½ teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Gumbo Filé

Heat oil in large kettle; cook Onions in oil until golden. Add hot
water, Chicken Seasoned Stock Base, Beau Monde, Mei Yen, Garlic Powder,
Chili Pequins, Green Peppers, celery, Parsley, Bay Leaf, Thyme, and
tomatoes. Simmer for about 1 hour. Add shrimp and cook 15 minutes; stir
in Gumbo Filé and serve at once in soup bowls over steamed rice.


_Old Hickory Fish Chowder_                                  (4 Servings)

A quickly prepared chowder that’s filling enough for the main course for
lunch or supper. Old Hickory Fish Chowder has a robust smoky flavor even
though it hasn’t a bit of meat in it. Use either fresh or frozen fish,
whichever you prefer.

  1 pound halibut, haddock, cod, or other firm white fish
  2 cups cubed, raw potatoes
  3 cups water
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Whole Celery Seed
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Medium Grind Java Black Pepper
  2 cups rich milk
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS OLD HICKORY Smoked Salt
  1 tablespoon butter
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Dill Weed or Rosemary

Cut fish into cubes; remove any skin and bones. Place in 3-quart kettle
or saucepan. Add potatoes, water, Onions, Celery Seed, salt, and Pepper.
Simmer 30 to 35 minutes or until fish and potatoes are done. Add milk,
Old Hickory, and butter; heat just to boiling. Crush Dill Weed or
Rosemary and sprinkle on chowder. Serve in large soup plates or bowls as
a main course with crisp crackers.




SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base is a superb seasoning for many vegetables:
fresh, canned, and frozen.


_Potatoes_                                                  (4 Servings)

Peel 3 medium-size potatoes and cut into cubes. Add 4 teaspoons SPICE
ISLANDS Beef Stock Base and ½ cup water; cover and cook until tender and
liquid is absorbed, turn potatoes in liquid once or twice while cooking.
Sprinkle with Spice Islands Java Black Pepper.


_Onions_                                                    (4 Servings)

Peel 1 to 1½ pounds small yellow or white onions. Place in 1-quart
casserole. Stir 1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base into ¾ cup
water and pour over onions. Cover and bake in a 350° F. oven for about 1
hour or until tender.


_Carrots_                                                   (4 Servings)

Scrape and slice 3 medium-size carrots. Add 1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS
Beef Stock Base and ½ cup water. Cook over low heat until tender, turn
once or twice during cooking.


_Frozen Vegetables_                                         (4 Servings)

             (Such as lima beans, green beans, or broccoli)

Stir 2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base into ½ cup water. Place
frozen vegetables in saucepan and pour Beef Stock over vegetables. Cover
and cook until tender, turn vegetables once or twice during cooking.


_Canned Vegetables_                                         (4 Servings)

     (Such as green or yellow beans, carrots, or mixed vegetables)

Drain liquid from 1-pound can vegetables. Add 1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS
Beef Stock Base and 1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions.
Simmer until liquid is reduced to about ¼ cup. Add vegetables; heat
thoroughly. Add 1 tablespoon butter, if desired.


_Gingered Carrots_                                          (4 Servings)

  1 pound carrots
  ½ cup water
  ½ tsp. SPICE ISLANDS MEI YEN Seasoning Powder
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Jamaica Ginger
  ½ teaspoon sugar
  2 tablespoons butter

Scrape carrots. Cut into julienne strips. Cook in ½ cup water seasoned
with Mei Yen Seasoning Powder. When tender, add Ground Ginger, sugar,
and butter. Continue cooking 3 or 4 minutes, tossing gently.


_Savory Zucchini_                                           (4 Servings)

Cutting the zucchini into thin match-like sticks and cooking only until
crisp-tender is one of the secrets of this unusual way with zucchini.

  1 pound zucchini
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions
  4 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Beef Stock Base
  ½ cup water

Wash zucchini and cut in half. Slice thinly lengthwise; then slice again
into match-like sticks. Melt butter in wide heavy frying pan. Add
Instant Minced Onions, Beef Stock Base, and water. Stir to mix and add
zucchini. Cook quickly over high heat, turning frequently with pancake
turner or bread spatula. Cook only until zucchini is crisp-tender and
liquid absorbed, about 5 minutes. Serve at once.


_Chicken Livers Stroganoff_                                 (5 Servings)

  1 lb. chicken livers
  ¼ cup butter
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Instant Minced Onions soaked in 2
              tablespoons water
  2 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base mixed in ½ cup
              water
  ½ pint sour cream
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS BEAU MONDE Seasoning
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS SPICE PARISIENNE
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper
  2 tablespoons sherry
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Shredded Parsley

Cut livers in two. Brown in butter in frying pan 5 minutes, turning
frequently. Remove livers, and stir in Onions, Arrowroot, Powdered
Mushrooms, Chicken Stock and cook until thickened. Stir in sour cream,
Beau Monde, Spice Parisienne, salt, Pepper. Add chicken livers, sherry.
Heat thoroughly but do not boil. Sprinkle with Parsley.


_Crab Meat in Mushroom Sauce Parisienne_                    (4 servings)

The superbly flavored sauce makes this an exceptionally good luncheon or
buffet dish.

  1 pound crab meat
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Powdered Mushrooms
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Chicken Seasoned Stock Base
  ½ cup hot water
  ½ cup rich milk or cream
  ½ cup dry white wine
  ¼ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Tarragon, crushed
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS SPICE PARISIENNE
  ⅛ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Fine Grind Java Black Pepper
  ½ cup buttered bread crumbs

Arrange crab meat in a lightly buttered baking dish, or individual
ramekins. In a saucepan melt butter, stir in Arrowroot, Mushrooms.
Dissolve Chicken Base in hot water. Stir into sauce and cook until sauce
is thick, smooth. Add cream, wine, stir until smooth. Add Tarragon,
Spice Parisienne, Pepper. Pour over crab meat and top with crumbs. Bake
in 350° oven until bubbly and brown.

                                  VINEGAR CHART
   SPICE      SALADS    VEGETABLES     MEATS        FISH      SAUCES    GRAVIES
  ISLANDS

 TARRAGON   FRUIT      BAKED BEANS  STEWS        BAKED      FISH        A FEW
 Red Wine   GREEN      BEETS        ROASTS       BROILED    GAME        DROPS
 VINEGAR    POTATO     CHARD        BROILED      WITH       RAVIGOTE    IN MEAT
            FISH       SPINACH      CHICKEN      BUTTER     VINAIGRETTE GRAVIES
                       WATER CRESS  BUTTER SAUCE SAUCE      SPANISH     TO TASTE

 GARLIC     FISH       BAKED BEANS  POT ROAST    BAKED      TARTAR
 Red Wine   GREEN      ARTICHOKES   ROAST LAMB   BROILED    FISH
 VINEGAR    POTATO     SPROUTS      STEWS        WITH
            VEGETABLE  WATER CRESS               BUTTER
                                                 SAUCE

 ESCHALOT   SLICED     ARTICHOKES   RAGOUTS      AU GRATIN  FISH
 Red Wine   ONION OR   CUCUMBERS                            MUSHROOM
 VINEGAR    CUCUMBER   ONIONS
            LOBSTER
            CRAB
            SHRIMP
            GREEN
            POTATOES

 BASIL      FRUIT      TOMATOES     A FEW DROPS  FROG LEGS  TOMATO      A FEW
 White      GREEN      BEETS        ON ROAST     DEVILED    FISH        DROPS
 Wine       TOMATO     STRING BEANS LAMB AND     CRAB                   IN LAMB
 VINEGAR    LOBSTER    CARROTS      STEWS TO     LOBSTER                GRAVY
            CRAB       JULIENNE     TASTE                               TO TASTE


_Vanilla Sauce_                                             (8 Servings)

Simple desserts like bread pudding, chocolate blanc mange, or whipped
fruit gelatin become something special when topped with this smooth
sauce.

  2″ piece SPICE ISLANDS Vanilla Bean
  1 cup milk
  1 cup light cream
  ½ cup sugar
  4 egg yolks, beaten
  ¼ cup heavy cream

Split Vanilla Bean, scrape out pulp, add pulp and pod to milk and cream
in top of double boiler, scald over direct heat. Remove Vanilla Pod.
Stir in sugar. Beat egg yolks slightly. Beat milk into egg yolks. Return
to top of double boiler. Place over hot water, cook until custard coats
a metal spoon. Stir constantly. Strain, cool. Whip cream until stiff and
fold into custard.


_Orange Hard Sauce_

  ½ cup butter
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Orange Peel
  4 cups sifted powdered sugar
  1 egg
  2 tablespoons Vanilla Brandy

Cream butter, add SPICE ISLANDS Orange Peel and powdered sugar. Beat in
egg. Add Vanilla Brandy and blend thoroughly. Serve on plum pudding,
mince pie or to frost plain or angel food cake.


_Vanilla Brandy_

The most delicious flavoring extract imaginable!

Cut two SPICE ISLANDS Mexican Vanilla Beans in 1″ pieces. Split pods
open. Drop into a half pint brandy. Tightly close bottle, let stand 30
days. Use for flavoring whipped cream, ice cream, hard sauce, cakes,
pies, and puddings.


_Ginger Apple Pie_                                          (6 Servings)

Adding a new flavor to an American tradition.

  1 #2 can pie-sliced apples
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Arrowroot
  ⅔ cup brown sugar
  1 to 2 tablespoons SPICE ISLANDS Crystallized Ginger, finely chopped
  1 tablespoon butter
  Pastry for 8″ double crust pie

Drain apples. Combine juice with Arrowroot and cook over low heat until
juice starts to thicken. Stir in sugar, apples and Ginger. Pour into
pastry-lined 8″ pie pan. Dot with butter. Top with pastry. Bake 40
minutes in 400° oven or until crust is done and brown.


_Spice Gems_                                          (Makes 20 Cookies)

  3 cups flour
  1 teaspoon baking soda
  3 teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Pumpkin Pie Spice
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup shortening
  2 cups brown sugar
  ⅔ cup thick sour cream
  2 well-beaten eggs
  2 teaspoons vanilla

Cream shortening, add sugar, beating until light, fluffy. Add vanilla,
eggs, mix thoroughly. Sift flour, soda, Spices, salt together 3 times.
Add alternately with sour cream to shortening mixture. Mix well. Drop
from teaspoon onto greased baking sheet. Bake in 350° oven for 12
minutes.


_Greek Walnut Cake_                                        (12 Servings)

Certainly different in the way of desserts is this torte-like cake.
Serve it plain, or top with whipped cream flavored with Vanilla Brandy
and slivered Crystallized Ginger.

  3 cups ground walnuts (about ½ pound shelled walnuts)
  9 eggs
  1 cup sugar
  ½ cup fine dry bread crumbs
  1 tablespoon SPICE ISLANDS Orange Peel
  1½ teaspoons SPICE ISLANDS Lemon Peel
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon SPICE ISLANDS Ground Cloves
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ cup Vanilla Brandy
  3 tablespoons water

Grind walnuts through medium blade of food chopper. Separate eggs; beat
egg yolks and sugar until thick and lemon colored. Mix the ground nuts
with bread crumbs, Orange Peel, Lemon Peel, salt, Cinnamon, Cloves, and
baking powder. Stir into egg yolk mixture. Mix in Vanilla Brandy and
water. Beat egg whites until stiff but not dry. Fold gently, but
thoroughly, into batter. Pour into greased 12″ × 9″ baking pan. Bake in
350° F. oven 30 to 35 minutes or until a sharp knife inserted in center
comes out clean.




                                _Index_


                                   A
  Page
  Allspice                                                            11
  Arrowroot                                    8-11-13-14-19-20-21-26-29


                                   B
  Basil                                                      10-15-16-17
  Bay Leaves                                            9-13-16-17-22-23
  Beau Monde Seasoning                    3-4-5-7-9-10-12-14-15-21-23-26
  Beef Stock Base                                        4-8-14-15-24-25
  Bell Peppers, Green                                       3-4-12-14-23
  Bell Peppers, Red                                                    3
  Bouquet Garni for Beef                                        12-15-18
  Bouquet Garni for Soup                                               4


                                   C
  Celery Salt                                                          3
  Celery Seed                                                       6-23
  Chicken Seasoned Stock Base                         3-5-18-19-22-23-26
  Chili Con Carne Seasoning Powder                                     9
  Chili Pequins                                                       23
  Cinnamon, Ground                                                 11-29
  Cloves                                                         9-11-13
  Curry Powder                                                        20


                                   D
  Dill Weed                                                       3-6-23


                                   F
  Fines Herbes                                                        10


                                   G
  Garlic Chips                                                        18
  Garlic Powder                           7-9-13-14-15-18-19-20-21-22-23
  Ginger, Ground                                                      25
  Crystallized Ginger                                              20-29
  Gumbo Filé                                                          23


                                   H
  Horseradish                                                         12


                                   L
  Lemon Peel                                                    10-20-29


                                   M
  Marjoram                                                    3-10-16-17
  Mei Yen Seasoning Powder                       11-13-15-18-20-21-23-25
  MSG (Monosodium Glutamate)                                          21
  Mushrooms, Powdered                                   5-13-14-19-22-26
  Mustard (Hot)                                                  7-12-19
  Mayonnaise Mustard (Mild)                                         5-11
  Mustard Seed                                                       3-9


                                   N
  Nutmeg, Ground                                                      29


                                   O
  Onion Powder                                            6-7-9-10-11-21
  Instant Minced Onions         3-4-5-8-12-13-14-18-19-20-21-22-23-25-26
  Shredded Green Onions                                                3
  Orange Peel                                                   18-28-29
  Oregano                                               9-11-13-15-16-17


                                   P
  Paprika                                                            7-9
  Parsley, Shredded                         3-4-6-9-10-12-16-17-22-23-26
  Java Black Pepper, Cracked                               5-6-7-9-11-21
  Java Black Pepper, Medium Grind                                  18-23
  Java Black Pepper, Fine Grind                8-12-14-15-18-19-21-24-26
  Java Black Pepper, Whole                                            13
  Nepal Pepper                                                        10
  Peppermint                                                       16-17
  Poppy Seed                                                           7
  Poultry Seasoning                                                   22
  Pumpkin Pie Spice                                                   29


                                   R
  Rosemary                                                   16-17-20-23


                                   S
  Saffron                                                       16-17-21
  Sage                                                       10-16-17-22
  Salad Herbs                                                          7
  Old Hickory Smoked Salt                                     9-19-21-23
  Spaghetti Sauce Seasoning                                           14
  Spice Parisienne                                              12-19-26
  Summer Savory                                               3-11-16-17


                                   T
  Tarragon                                              9-10-16-17-22-26
  Thyme                                              3-10-16-17-21-22-23


                                   V
  Vanilla Beans                                                       28
  Red Wine Vinegar                                                    13
  Red Wine Vinegar, Eschalot                                      6-9-27
  Red Wine Vinegar, Garlic                                        6-9-27
  Red Wine Vinegar, Tarragon                                6-9-10-11-27
  White Wine Vinegar                                               3-6-7
  White Wine Vinegar, Sweet Basil                                   5-27
  White Wine Vinegar, Tarragon                                         7




                        _New from_ SPICE ISLANDS
                         Instant Toasted Onions


SPICE ISLANDS Instant Toasted Onions are ready to use instantly without
tears, strong odors, and tiresome slicing or chopping. They immediately
impart the sweet, mild flavor of sauteed onions with an added crisp,
crunchy texture. Instant Toasted Onions give the delicious flavor of
sauteed onions to soups, casseroles, stuffings, and ground meat. Add
them to salads, sauces, dips and egg dishes without rehydrating for
crispest texture and fullest flavor.

Write to Spice Islands Company, South San Francisco, Dept. TO, for our
exciting new recipe leaflet on Instant Toasted Onions and other
seasoning suggestions.

_Handsome for your Kitchen Wall_

Spice Islands spice rack (illustrated on front cover) of imported
hardwoods in warm, glowing, walnut-toned finish. An accessory as
beautiful as it is useful!

  1-shelf rock holds 8 Spice Islands jars
  2-shelf rack holds 16 Spice Islands jars
  3-shelf rack holds 24 Spice Islands jars

Ask for it at your grocer’s or gourmet shop.


                             SPICE ISLANDS
                   SPICES • HERBS • VINEGARS • TEAS ®

                           100 E. GRAND AVE.
                      SOUTH SAN FRANCISCO, CALIF.

               _The Finest Flavors From Around The World_




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Collectors' Items, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTORS' ITEMS ***

***** This file should be named 62345-0.txt or 62345-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/3/4/62345/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
