The Project Gutenberg EBook of Let's Cook Meat, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Let's Cook Meat
       Recipes You'll Like

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 1, 2020 [EBook #62804]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LET'S COOK MEAT ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                              _Let’s cook
                                  MEAT
                          Recipes you’ll like_


                        _Holiday Greetings from_
                        PHIL’S THRIFTWAY MARKET
                          118 N. Killingsworth
                            Portland, Oregon


                 YOUR RECIPES _and where to find them_

    [Illustration: YOUR RECIPES _and where to find them_]

  Beef Recipes and Menus
  Baked Beef and Rice                                                  6
  Beef Chili Patties                                                   9
  Beef Pot-Roast                                                      10
  Beef Put-Together                                                    9
  Beef Short Ribs-Raisin Sauce                                         8
  Broiled Porterhouse or Sirloin Steak                                 6
  Corned Beef and Cabbage                                              5
  Chinese Pepper Steak with Rice                                       7
  Deviled Steak                                                        7
  Family Meat Loaf                                                    10
  Leftovers
      Beef Puff                                                       11
      Leftover Treat                                                  11
  Onion ’Burgers                                                       8
  Standing Ribs of Beef                                                5
  Veal Recipes and Menus
  Leftovers
      Ladies’ Aid Salad                                               15
      Meat-Potato-Tomato Cakes                                        15
      Veal Croquettes                                                 15
  Paprika Veal                                                        14
  Pineapple Stuffed Veal Birds                                        14
  Sour Cream Veal Loaf                                                13
  Veal Shoulder Roll                                                  13
  Pork Recipes and Menus
  Baked Smoked Ham-Buffet Glaze                                       18
  Barbecued Pork Chops                                                17
  Candied Ham Loaf                                                    19
  Golden Filled Pork Rolls                                            22
  Leftovers
      Ham-Noodle-Mushroom Casserole                                   23
  Swiss Salad                                                         23
  Pork Chop-Potato Scallop                                            18
  Pork Loin Roast                                                     17
  Pork Tenderloin Supreme                                             19
  Smoked Ham Slice-Apricot Glaze                                      22
  Lamb Recipes and Menus
  Braised Rolled Lamb Shoulder                                        25
  Broiled Lamb Chops                                                  25
  Fruited Lamb Chops                                                  27
  Lamb Kabobs                                                         26
  Leftovers
      Lamb Croquettes                                                 28
      Lamb Pie with Catchup Biscuits                                  28
      Shepherd’s Pie                                                  28
  Leg of Lamb-Puffy Mint Pears                                        26
  Oriental Lamb Stew                                                  27
  Sausages, Canned Meats, Etc.
  Chipped Beef-Potato Dumplings                                       30
  Cherry Meat Muffins                                                 32
  Frankfurter and Sauerkraut Pie                                      29
  Fruited Ham Rolls                                                   31
  Sausage Links in Batter Pudding                                     29
  Smoky Sausage-Spaghetti Sauce                                       32
  Southern Sausage Breakfast                                          30
  Summer Salad Bowl                                                   31
  Variety Meats Recipes and Menus
  Heart Andalouse                                                     33
  Liver Rolls                                                         33
  Smoked Tongue Rarebit                                               34
  Sweetbreads-Canadian-Style Bacon-Pineapple Grill                    34
  Baked Goods Recipes
  Biscuits                                                            40
  Date-Nut Drops                                                      39
  Homemade Pastry Mix                                                 40
  Orange-Nut Cake                                                     39
  Pumpkin Pecan Pie                                                   38
  Single Pie Crust                                                    38
  Southern Marble Cake                                                40
  Meat Buying and Cooking Helps
  Cuts, Cooking Methods, Etc.                              4, 12, 16, 24
  Steps in Meat Cookery                                              2-3
  Ground Meat—Its Many Possibilities                               20-21
  Time-tables—Meat Cookery                                         35-37


                              Published by
                   National Live Stock and Meat Board
                       Home Economics Department
                  407 S. Dearborn St., Chicago 5, Ill.
                      1953-54    Printed In U.S.A.




                         Meat Cookery Pointers


Roasts may be seasoned before, during or after cooking, since salt
penetrates only to about ½ inch.

                                   •

Boned and rolled roasts require approximately 10 minutes per pound more
cooking time than roasts with the bone left in.

                                   •

Pot-roasts, Swiss steaks, “birds,” chops and other cuts cooked by
braising should be browned slowly in order to retain the attractive
brown color during cooking.

                                   •

Steaks, chops and patties broiled at moderate temperatures require only
one turning during cooking.

                                   •

Meat cuts cooked in liquid increase in weight and are juicier if they
are allowed to cool in the cooking liquid and under refrigeration.

                                   •

Low temperature cookery yields 10 to 30 per cent more meat to serve.

                                   •

Meat that is overcooked shrinks more, is less palatable, less attractive
and more difficult to carve.

                                   •

Searing does not seal in meat juices but actually increases cooking
losses.

                                   •

Turning meat occasionally during panbroiling insures even cooking
throughout the cut.


                               _TO ROAST_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1. Season with salt and pepper.
  2. Place meat fat side up on rack in open roasting pan.
  3. Insert meat thermometer.
  4. Do not add water. Do not cover. Do not baste.
  5. Roast in a slow oven (300° F. for beef, veal, lamb, and smoked
              pork; 350° F. for fresh pork).
  6. Roast to desired degree of doneness.


                               _TO BROIL_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1. Set oven regulator for broiling.
  2. Place meat 2 to 3 inches from heat.
  3. Broil until top of meat is brown.
  4. Season with salt and pepper.
  5. Turn meat and cook until done.
  6. Season and serve at once.


                             _TO PANBROIL_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1. Place meat in heavy frying-pan.
  2. Do not add fat. Do not add water. Do not cover.
  3. Cook slowly, turning occasionally.
  4. Pour fat from pan as it accumulates.
  5. Brown meat on both sides.
  6. Season. Serve at once.


                              _TO BRAISE_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1. Brown meat on all sides in fat in heavy utensil.
  2. Season with salt and pepper.
  3. Add small amount of liquid, if necessary.
  4. Cover tightly.
  5. Cook at low temperature until tender.


                           _TO COOK IN LIQUID
                           Stews—Large Cuts_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1. Brown meat on all sides in own fat or lard, when desirable.
  2. Season with salt and pepper.
  3. Cover with liquid, cover kettle, cook below boiling point until
              tender.
  4. Add vegetables just long enough before serving to be cooked.


                              _TO PANFRY_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1. Brown meat on both sides in small amount of fat.
  2. Season with salt and pepper.
  3. Do not cover.
  4. Cook at moderate temperature until done, turning occasionally.
  5. Remove from pan and serve at once.




                         Meat Cookery Pointers


Pot-roasts, other braised dishes and stews may be conveniently cooked in
a moderate oven (300° F. to 350° F.)

                                   •

Meat cubes are browned for a brown stew; browning is omitted if a light
stew is preferred.

                                   •

A roast meat thermometer is inserted so the bulb reaches the center of
the largest muscle but does not rest in fat or on bone.

                                   •

Cooked meat should be stored closely covered in the coldest part of the
refrigerator.

                                   •

All meat is tender if cooked by the correct cookery method.

                                   •

Steaks and chops for broiling should be cut at least an inch thick.

                                   •

Panbroiling is a convenient method for cooking thin beef or lamb steaks,
chops or patties and smoked ham slices, bacon and Canadian-style bacon.

                                   •

Roasts are more easily carved if the meat is allowed to “set” 20 to 30
minutes before carving.

                                   •

For ease in carving, have the back bone loosened on beef rib and pork
loin roasts before cooking.

                                   •

A roast meat thermometer registers the internal temperature or degree of
doneness of a roast.


                     Beef Cuts and Cooking Methods

    [Illustration: Beef Blade Pot-Roast]

ROAST: Standing ribs; rolled ribs; rump (high quality) and loaf.

BROIL: Rib, club, tenderloin (filet mignon), T-bone, porterhouse,
sirloin and top round steaks and patties.

PANBROIL: The same cuts as prepared by broiling. Cuts cooked by this
method are cut thinner than those cooked by broiling.

PANFRY: Thin rib, club, tenderloin (filet mignon), T-bone, porterhouse
and sirloin steaks; patties and brains.

BRAISE: Pot-roasts—arm, blade, rump (bone in and boneless); arm, blade,
round and flank steaks; short ribs; plate; brisket; cross cut shanks;
heart; kidney; brains and liver.

COOK IN LIQUID (Large cuts and stews): neck; shank; heel of round;
plate; brisket; short ribs; corned beef; stew meat; heart; kidney;
tongue; brains and sweetbreads.


                         Other Facts About Beef

The quality and tenderness of beef cuts are the two factors which
determine the cooking method used in their preparation. Tender cuts
cooked by roasting, broiling and panbroiling may be served rare, medium
or well done. Less tender cuts cooked by braising, panfrying or in
liquid should be cooked well done. Some beef is marketed as corned beef
and some as dried beef to provide flavor variety. Frozen beef cuts may
be stored at 0° F. or lower, 6 to 12 months.




                             _Recipes for_ BEEF


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


                         Standing Ribs of Beef

    [Illustration: Standing ribs]




                               MENU IDEA
                               Fruit Cup
                         Standing Ribs of Beef
                             Baked Potatoes
                               Asparagus
                           Tossed Green Salad
                               Hot Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                               Apple Pie
                                Beverage

  _2 to 3-rib beef standing rib roast_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_

Have the market man remove the chine bone to make carving easier.
Season. Place fat side up on rack in open roasting pan. Insert meat
thermometer so the bulb reaches the center of the thickest part, being
sure that the bulb does not rest in fat or on bone. Do not add water. Do
not cover. Roast in slow oven (300° F.) to the desired degree of
doneness. Allow 18 to 20 minutes per pound for cooking a rare roast; 22
to 25 minutes for medium; and 27 to 30 minutes for well-done.


                        Corned Beef and Cabbage

    [Illustration: Corned beef]




                               MENU IDEA
                        Corned Beef and Cabbage
                           Parsleyed Potatoes
                          Carrot-Raisin Salad
                               Rye Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                              Gingerbread
                                Beverage

  _3 to 4 pounds corned beef_
  _Water to cover_
  _1 large head cabbage, cut in wedges_

Cover corned beef with water. Cover closely and bring to a boil. Reduce
heat to simmer and cook slowly until tender, allowing about 1 hour per
pound. Fifteen minutes before meat is done add cabbage wedges and
continue cooking until meat and cabbage are done. 6 to 8 servings.


                  Broiled Porterhouse or Sirloin Steak

    [Illustration: Porterhouse steak]




                               MENU IDEA
                       Broiled Porterhouse Steak
                         French Fried Potatoes
                              Green Beans
                           Tomato-Onion Salad
                          Garlic French Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Angel Food Cake
                                Beverage

  _Beef porterhouse or sirloin steak, cut 1 to 2 inches thick_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_

Set regulator to broil. Place steak on broiler rack. Insert broiler pan
and rack so the top of 1-inch steak is 2 inches from the heat and 2-inch
steak is 3 inches from the heat. When one side is browned, season, turn
and finish cooking on the second side. Season.

Steaks cut 1 inch thick require 18 to 20 minutes for rare steak and 20
to 25 minutes for medium-done steak. Steaks cut 2 inches thick require
30 to 35 minutes for rare steak and 35 to 45 minutes for medium-done
steak. 1 to 2 servings may be obtained from a 1-inch porterhouse steak;
2 to 4 servings from a 2-inch porterhouse steak; 3 to 6 servings from a
1-inch sirloin steak; 6 to 12 servings from a 2-inch sirloin steak.


                          Baked Beef and Rice

    [Illustration: Ground beef]




                               MENU IDEA
                          Baked Beef and Rice
                             Harvard Beets
                                  Peas
                            Perfection Salad
                              Hot Muffins
                          Butter or Margarine
                          Southern Marble Cake
                                Beverage

  _1 pound ground beef_
  _1 cup rice_
  _1 small onion, chopped_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _½ teaspoon pepper_
  _1 teaspoon paprika_
  _1 small bottle olives, sliced_
  _2 cups tomato juice_
  _1½ cups boiling water_
  _½ cup grated cheese_

Cook ground beef, rice and chopped onion in drippings until lightly
browned. Season. Add sliced olives, tomato juice and boiling water.
Place in 1½-quart casserole, cover and bake in a slow oven (300° F.) 1
hour. Uncover, sprinkle with cheese and continue baking about 10 minutes
or until cheese is melted. 6 servings.


                     Chinese Pepper Steak with Rice

    [Illustration: Blade steak]




                               MENU IDEA
                          Chinese Pepper Steak
                                  Rice
                                Broccoli
                        Jellied Pineapple Salad
                              Butterhorns
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Boston Cream Pie
                                Beverage

  _Beef arm steak, cut 1 inch thick_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _2 tablespoons minced onion_
  _1 clove garlic, minced_
  _2 large green peppers, cut into strips_
  _½ cup celery, sliced crosswise_
  _2 tablespoons chopped pimiento, if desired_
  _½ cup consomme or stock_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_
  _2 teaspoons cornstarch_
  _2 tablespoons water_
  _1 teaspoon soy sauce_
  _3 cups boiled rice_

Cut steak into thin strips. Brown meat in lard or drippings. Add the
onion, garlic, green peppers, celery and pimiento. Add consomme or
stock. Season with salt and pepper. Cover and simmer 20 minutes. Thicken
with cornstarch blended with water and soy sauce. Simmer 5 minutes.
Serve hot with freshly boiled rice. 4 servings.


                             Deviled Steak

    [Illustration: Arm steak]




                               MENU IDEA
                             Deviled Steak
                           Scalloped Potatoes
                               Asparagus
                          Orange-Avocado Salad
                              Hot Biscuits
                          Butter or Margarine
                         Chocolate Chiffon Pie
                                Beverage

  _Beef Arm steak, cut 1 inch thick_
  _¼ cup flour_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _1 large onion, sliced_
  _1 teaspoon dry mustard_
  _⅛ teaspoon paprika_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _3 tablespoons vinegar_
  _1 cup hot water_

Cut steak into individual servings. Dredge steak with flour and brown
both sides in lard or drippings. Place sliced onion over meat. Add
seasonings, vinegar and water. Cover closely and cook in a slow oven
(300° F.) for about 1 hour or until tender. Thicken the remaining liquid
for gravy. 6 servings.


                             Onion ’Burgers

    [Illustration: Ground beef]




                               MENU IDEA
                             Onion ’Burgers
                              Potato Chips
                              Baked Beans
                            Sliced Tomatoes
                                  Buns
                          Assorted Fresh Fruit
                                Cookies
                                Beverage

  _1½ pounds ground beef_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _1½ cups chopped onion_
  _2 tablespoons butter or margarine_
  _2 teaspoons prepared horseradish_
  _2 teaspoons prepared mustard_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _6 split buns_

Combine ground beef, salt and pepper. Shape into 12 thin patties. Brown
chopped onion lightly in butter or margarine, add horseradish, mustard
and salt. Spread onion mixture over 6 patties, top each with a patty and
press together. Chill. Place patties on broiler rack. Insert broiler pan
allowing 2 inches between heat and surface of meat. Broil patties on one
side until brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Turn and brown on second side. Serve
on buns, if desired. 6 servings.


                      Beef Short Ribs—Raisin Sauce

    [Illustration: Short ribs]




                               MENU IDEA
                            Beef Short Ribs
                             Baked Potatoes
                               Lima Beans
                           Tomato-Onion Salad
                              Hot Biscuits
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Peach Crumb Pie
                                Beverage

  _3 pounds beef short ribs_
  _3 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_
  _1 onion, quartered_
  _½ cup brown sugar_
  _1 teaspoon dry mustard_
  _1 tablespoon flour_
  _2 tablespoons vinegar_
  _2 tablespoons lemon juice_
  _¼ teaspoon grated lemon rind_
  _1 bay leaf_
  _1½ cups water_
  _½ cup raisins_

Cut ribs into serving pieces and brown in own fat or a small amount of
lard or drippings. Pour off drippings, season ribs with salt and pepper.
Add quartered onion. Combine remaining ingredients and bring to a boil.
Pour over short ribs. Cover closely and cook slowly about 2 hours or
until meat is tender. Thicken sauce if desired. 6 to 8 servings.


                           Beef Put-Together

    [Illustration: Beef cubes]




                               MENU IDEA
                           Beef Put-Together
                              Steamed Rice
                           Head Lettuce Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                              Rhubarb Pie
                                Beverage

  _1 pound boneless beef for stew, cut in 1-inch cubes_
  _3 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _1 medium onion, sliced_
  _1 green pepper, sliced_
  _1 cup diced celery_
  _1 cup diced carrots_
  _1 can condensed tomato soup_
  _1½ teaspoons salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _½ cup cooked peas_
  _2 cups hot, cooked rice_

Brown meat in lard or drippings. Add onion and green pepper and cook 5
minutes. Add celery, carrots, tomato soup and seasonings. Cover and cook
slowly about 1 hour or until meat and vegetables are done. Add cooked
peas and serve over hot, cooked rice. 4 servings.


                           Beef Chili Patties

    [Illustration: Ground beef patties]




                               MENU IDEA
                           Beef Chili Patties
                            Whipped Potatoes
                               Lima Beans
                           Tossed Green Salad
                               Rye Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Apple Dumplings
                                Beverage

  _1 pound ground beef_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _1 egg, beaten_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _2 tablespoons chopped onion_
  _2 tablespoons chopped green pepper_
  _1 No. 303 can tomatoes, drained_
  _1 cup cooked corn_
  _1 teaspoon chili powder_
  _2 teaspoons salt_

Combine ground beef, salt, pepper and egg. Shape into 8 small patties
and place in a baking dish. Cook onion and green pepper in lard or
drippings for 2 minutes. Add tomatoes, corn, chili powder and salt and
pour over meat patties. Bake in a slow oven (300° F.) for 30 minutes. 4
servings.


                             Beef Pot-Roast

    [Illustration: Arm pot-roast]




                               MENU IDEA
                             Beef Pot-Roast
                                Noodles
                                  Peas
                          Spinach-Radish Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                       Pineapple Upside-Down Cake
                                Beverage

  _3 to 4-pound beef arm or blade pot-roast_
  _2 tablespoons flour_
  _2 teaspoons salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _3 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _¼ cup water_
  _3 cups seasoned cooked noodles_
  _1 12-ounce package frozen peas, cooked or 1 No. 303 can peas_
  _2 tablespoons butter or margarine_

Dredge pot-roast with seasoned flour and brown in lard or drippings. Add
water, cover and simmer in a slow oven (300° F.) or on top of range 3
hours or until tender. Thicken cooking liquid for gravy, if desired.
Combine noodles, peas and butter or margarine. Cook until heated
through. Serve pot-roast on noodles and peas. 6 to 8 servings.


                            Family Meat Loaf

    [Illustration: Ground beef and pork]




                               MENU IDEA
                            Family Meat Loaf
                            Mashed Potatoes
                              Green Beans
                         Tomato-Cucumber Salad
                               Hot Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Lemon Sherbet
                                Cookies
                                Beverage

  _2 pounds ground beef_
  _1 pound ground pork_
  _1 cup fine dry bread crumbs_
  _1 cup milk_
  _1½ tablespoons chopped onion_
  _1 tablespoon minced parsley_
  _1 egg, slightly beaten_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _½ teaspoon celery salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _¼ teaspoon ground cloves_
  _¼ teaspoon nutmeg_
  _1 tablespoon lemon juice_
  _1 teaspoon grated lemon rind_

Soak bread crumbs in milk. Combine ground beef and pork, bread crumbs,
onion, parsley, beaten egg, seasonings, lemon juice and lemon rind. Mix
thoroughly. Pack in a 5 × 9-inch loaf pan. Bake in a moderate oven (350°
F.) for 1½ hours. 10 to 12 servings.


                       RECIPES FOR BEEF LEFTOVERS


                               Beef Puff

  _2 cups ground cooked beef_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _2 tablespoons chopped parsley_
  _½ cup mayonnaise_
  _8 slices bread_
  _Butter or margarine, softened_
  _3 eggs, slightly beaten_
  _2 cups milk_
  _¼ teaspoon salt_
  _¼ teaspoon sage_

Combine meat, salt, pepper, parsley and mayonnaise. Spread 4 slices
bread with butter or margarine, cover with meat mixture and top with
slice of bread. Place sandwiches in greased shallow casserole dish.
Combine eggs, milk, salt and sage and mix well. Pour over sandwiches and
let stand in refrigerator at least an hour before baking. Bake in a
moderate oven (350° F.) about 45 minutes or until brown and puffed. 4
servings.


                             Leftover Treat

  _2½ cups diced cooked beef_
  _1 tablespoon minced onion_
  _1 tablespoon minced green pepper_
  _I tablespoon lard or drippings_
  _1 cup gravy or medium white sauce_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _¼ teaspoon chili powder_
  _1 tablespoon chili sauce_
  _1½ cups cooked rice_
  _3 tablespoons grated sharp cheddar cheese_
  _1 egg, slightly beaten_
  _½ cup crushed corn flakes_

Cook meat, onion and green pepper in lard or drippings until lightly
browned. Add gravy or white sauce, salt, pepper, chili powder and chili
sauce. Combine rice, grated cheese and egg, mixing thoroughly. Alternate
layers of rice and meat in a 1-quart greased baking dish. Sprinkle with
corn flakes. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) for 30 minutes. 6
servings.


                     Veal Cuts and Cooking Methods

    [Illustration: Veal Cutlets]

ROAST: Ribs; arm and blade roasts; rolled and cushion-style shoulder;
crown roast; loin; rump; leg; breast and loaf.

BROIL: Liver; kidneys; sweetbreads and brains. Veal steaks, chops and
patties are best cooked by braising or panfrying since these two methods
supply fat which is lacking in veal because it comes from a young
animal.

PANBROIL: Veal steaks, chops and patties are not panbroiled for the same
reason that they are not broiled.

PANFRY: Arm and blade steaks; rib and loin chops; kidney chops; sirloin
steak; round steak (cutlets); city chicken; mock chicken legs; patties;
liver; kidney; sweetbreads and brains.

BRAISE: Arm and blade steaks; rib and loin chops; kidney chops; breast;
riblets; sirloin steak; round steak (cutlets); heel of round pot-roast;
hind shank; city chicken; mock chicken legs; cubes; patties; heart;
kidneys; brains and sweetbreads.

COOK IN LIQUID: Riblets; shank; heel of round; stew meat; heart;
kidneys; tongue; brains and sweetbreads.


                         Other Facts About Veal

The mild appealing flavor of veal is brought out by proper cookery.
Since veal comes from a young animal and, consequently, lacks fat, it is
often desirable to place bacon or salt pork slices over veal roasts
before cooking. All veal is cooked well done. Frozen veal cuts may be
stored at 0° F. or lower, 6 to 9 months.




                             _Recipes for_ VEAL


    [Illustration: _Recipes for_ VEAL]


                           Veal Shoulder Roll

    [Illustration: Rolled shoulder roast]




                               MENU IDEA
                           Veal Shoulder Roll
                            Whipped Potatoes
                             Harvard Beets
                        Orange-Grapefruit Salad
                               Corn Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Butterscotch Pie
                                Beverage

  _3 to 4-pound veal shoulder roll_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_
  _4 to 6 slices bacon, if desired_

Season the roast with salt and pepper. Place on rack in open roasting
pan. Insert a meat thermometer so the bulb reaches the center of the
roast. Place bacon slices on roast. Do not add water. Do not cover.
Roast in slow oven (300° F.) until the meat thermometer registers 170°
F. or about 2½ hours. Allow about 40 minutes per pound for roasting.


                          Sour Cream Veal Loaf

    [Illustration: Ground veal and pork]




                               MENU IDEA
                          Sour Cream Veal Loaf
                           Au Gratin Potatoes
                                Broccoli
                          Orange-Carrot Salad
                           Parkerhouse Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Cherry Cobbler
                                Beverage

  _1½ pounds ground veal_
  _½ pound ground pork_
  _2 tablespoons minced onion_
  _2 carrots, ground_
  _1½ teaspoons salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _½ cup sour cream_
  _Flour_

Combine all ingredients and mix thoroughly. Pack into a 5 × 9-inch loaf
pan and bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) 1½ hours. Thicken drippings
for gravy, allowing 2 tablespoons flour for each cup of drippings. 6 to
8 servings.


                      Pineapple Stuffed Veal Birds

    [Illustration: Round steak cut for Birds]




                               MENU IDEA
                               Veal Birds
                           Parsleyed Potatoes
                               Asparagus
                          Apricot-Cheese Salad
                                Muffins
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Lemon Cream Pie
                                Beverage

  _2 veal round steaks, cut ½ inch thick_
  _½ cup crushed pineapple_
  _¼ cup melted butter or margarine_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _½ teaspoon sage_
  _2 cups soft bread crumbs_
  _3 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_
  _¼ cup water_

Remove bone from steaks and cut as shown in illustration. Drain the
crushed pineapple thoroughly. Add the pineapple, melted butter or
margarine, salt and sage to the bread crumbs. Mix well. Place a spoonful
of the pineapple stuffing on each piece of veal, roll and fasten with
wooden picks. Brown the rolls slowly in lard or drippings. Season with
salt and pepper. Add water, cover and simmer for 45 minutes or until
tender. 6 servings.


                              Paprika Veal

    [Illustration: Shoulder cubes]




                               MENU IDEA
                              Paprika Veal
                             Baked Potatoes
                            Brussels Sprouts
                             Cabbage Salad
                              French Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                              Cherry Torte
                                Beverage

  _1½ pounds veal shoulder, cut into 1½ inch cubes_
  _3 tablespoons lard or bacon drippings_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _½ teaspoon paprika_
  _¼ cup water_
  _Paprika Sauce_

Brown veal cubes in lard or drippings. Season. Add water, cover closely
and cook slowly 30 minutes. Cover with Paprika Sauce and continue
cooking slowly 30 minutes more or until meat is tender. 4 to 6 servings.


                             Paprika Sauce

  _¼ cup butter or margarine_
  _¼ cup flour_
  _2 cups milk_
  _Paprika_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_

Melt butter or margarine, add flour and mix well. Add milk gradually and
cook, stirring constantly until thickened. Add paprika to color and salt
and pepper to taste.


                       RECIPES FOR VEAL LEFTOVERS


                           Ladies’ Aid Salad

  _4 cups diced cooked veal_
  _1 cup salted almonds_
  _1 No. 303 can pineapple chunks_
  _2 cups diced celery_
  _2 hard-cooked eggs, diced_
  _Mayonnaise_
  _Lettuce Cups_

Cut almonds lengthwise into quarters. Drain pineapple. Combine veal,
pineapple, celery and eggs. Chill thoroughly. Just before serving add
almonds and enough mayonnaise to moisten ingredients. Mix lightly and
serve in lettuce cups. 8 servings.


                            Veal Croquettes

  _2 cups ground cooked veal_
  _1 cup mashed cooked peas_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _2 teaspoons grated onion_
  _½ cup fine dry bread crumbs_
  _1 egg, slightly beaten_
  _Lard for deep fat frying_

Combine ground veal, peas, salt, pepper and onion. Shape into
croquettes. Roll in bread crumbs, dip in egg and again in bread crumbs.
Fry in deep hot lard (360° F.) 1½ to 2 minutes or until brown. Drain. 6
servings.


                        Meat-Potato-Tomato Cakes

  _2 cups ground, cooked beef, veal, pork or lamb_
  _2 cups mashed potatoes_
  _2 eggs_
  _2 tablespoons minced onion_
  _2 tablespoons finely chopped celery_
  _½ cup tomato juice_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _8 slices tomato, cut ½ inch thick_
  _2 tablespoons melted butter or margarine_

Combine ground meat, mashed potatoes, eggs, onion, celery, tomato juice
and seasonings. Mix well and shape into 8 patties. Place patties in
greased baking pan. Top each pattie with a tomato slice. Brush tomato
slices with melted butter or margarine. Bake in a moderate oven (350°
F.) for 30 minutes. 6 to 8 servings.


                     Pork Cuts and Cooking Methods

    [Illustration: Baked Half Ham]

ROAST: Rolled and cushion-style shoulder; crown roast; blade loin; loin
(center cut); sirloin (bone in); boneless sirloin; Boston butt; fresh or
smoked picnic; fresh or smoked ham; smoked shoulder butt; tenderloin;
spareribs; pork loaf and ham loaf.

BROIL: Smoked ham slices; bacon and Canadian-style bacon. Chops, steaks,
patties and Frenched tenderloin are best cooked by braising or
panfrying, since these methods assure meat that is well done, tender and
juicy throughout by the time it is browned on the outside.

PANBROIL: Smoked ham slices; bacon and Canadian style bacon. Chops,
steaks, patties and Frenched tenderloin are not panbroiled for the same
reason that they are not broiled.

PANFRY: Shoulder steaks; rib and loin chops; patties; Frenched
tenderloin; smoked ham slices; bacon; Canadian-style bacon and liver.

BRAISE: Shoulder steaks; rib and loin chops; tenderloin; spareribs;
hocks; patties; cubes; liver; hearts and kidneys.

COOK IN LIQUID: Spareribs; hocks; smoked ham; picnic; shoulder butt and
shank; heart and kidneys.


                         Other Facts About Pork

For tenderness and appetite appeal, all pork should be cooked well done.
Cuts marketed as cured meats are hams, bacon, Canadian-style bacon,
shoulder butts and hocks. Frozen fresh pork may be stored at 0° F. or
lower, 3 to 6 months; freezing is not recommended for smoked pork.




                             _Recipes for_ PORK


    [Illustration: _Recipes for_ PORK]


                            Pork Loin Roast

    [Illustration: Loin roast]




                               MENU IDEA
                            Pork Loin Roast
                         Oven Browned Potatoes
                                Broccoli
                         Molded Cranberry Salad
                              Corn Sticks
                          Butter or Margarine
                           Pumpkin-Pecan Pie
                                Beverage

  _3 to 5-pound pork loin roast_
  _Salt and pepper_

Have backbone removed from loin. Season. Place fat side up on rack in
open roasting pan. Insert meat thermometer so bulb reaches center of
thickest part. Be careful that thermometer does not rest in fat or on
bone. Do not add water. Do not cover. Roast in moderate oven (350° F.)
until meat thermometer registers 185° F. Allow about 35 to 40 minutes
per pound for roasting.


                        Golden Filled Pork Rolls

    [Illustration: Arm steak]




                               MENU IDEA
                        Golden Filled Pork Rolls
                              Acorn Squash
                              Green Beans
                             Waldorf Salad
                            Cloverleaf Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Spice Layer Cake
                                Beverage

  _8 pork arm steaks, cut ½ inch thick_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_
  _1 No. 303 can cream-style corn_
  _1½ teaspoons salt_
  _2 eggs, beaten_
  _3 tablespoons melted butter or margarine_
  _¼ cup chopped green pepper_
  _2 tablespoons chopped onion_
  _4 cups soft bread crumbs_
  _½ teaspoon dry basil_
  _½ teaspoon sage_

Remove bones from pork steaks. Season with salt and pepper. Combine
remaining ingredients, mix lightly and spread on steaks. Roll each steak
like a jelly roll and tie or fasten with a skewer. Place rolls in a
baking dish and bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) for 1 hour. 8
servings.


                        Pork Chop-Potato Scallop

    [Illustration: Loin chops]




                               MENU IDEA
                        Pork Chop-Potato Scallop
                            Corn on the Cob
                          Spinach-Radish Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Blueberry Pie
                                Beverage

  _6 pork rib, loin or shoulder chops, cut ¾ to 1 inch thick_
  _Salt and pepper_
  _2 cups coarsely grated peeled potatoes_
  _2 tablespoons grated onion_
  _2 tablespoons flour_
  _1½ teaspoons salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _1½ cups milk_

Brown chops in frying-pan. Season with salt and pepper. Combine
remaining ingredients in order given and arrange in a shallow baking
dish. Place chops on potato mixture. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.)
for 1 hour or until done. 6 servings.


                     Baked Smoked Ham—Buffet Glaze

    [Illustration: Smoked ham]




                               MENU IDEA
                         Baked Ham-Buffet Glaze
                              Corn Pudding
                              Green Beans
                          Jellied Fruit Salad
                           Assorted Hot Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                              Banana Cake
                                Beverage

  _12-14 pound smoked ham_
  _Buffet Glaze_

Place ham, fat side up, on rack in open roasting pan. Insert meat
thermometer so the bulb reaches the center of the thickest part. Be
careful that the bulb does not rest in fat or on bone. Do not add water.
Do not cover. Roast in a slow oven (300° F.) until the meat thermometer
registers 160° F. Allow 18 to 20 minutes per pound for roasting. Remove
rind, chill and glaze.


                              Buffet Glaze

  _1½ tablespoons gelatine_
  _1¾ cups water_
  _2 bouillon cubes, if desired_
  _¼ teaspoon salt_
  _1 teaspoon sugar_
  _½ cup cream_
  _Green pepper strips_
  _1 small bottle stuffed olives_

Have ham chilled. Place fat side up for glazing. Soak gelatine in ¼ cup
cold water. Heat remaining water and dissolve bouillon cubes in it.
Strain. Add gelatine and stir until dissolved. Add salt and sugar. Cool.
Reserve ¾ of mixture and add cream to remaining mixture. Just before
cream mixture begins to congeal pour thin layer over surface of ham.
Chill until firm. Continue this process keeping cream glaze at cold
pouring consistency until it is all used. Keep a pan of hot water and
one of ice water convenient in order to control the consistency of the
gelatine mixtures. Arrange design of sliced olives and pepper strips on
glazed surface and cover with reserved transparent glaze in the same
fashion as the white glaze was applied. Chill. Serve as a cold meat.


                        Pork Tenderloin Supreme

    [Illustration: Tenderloin—patties (center)]




                               MENU IDEA
                        Pork Tenderloin Supreme
                            Mashed Potatoes
                              Green Beans
                             Cabbage Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                               Apple Pie
                                Beverage

  _12 slices bacon_
  _6 pork tenderloin patties_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_
  _6 slices tomato, cut ½ inch thick_
  _6 slices onion, cut ¼ inch thick_

Prepare each serving as follows: Cross 2 slices bacon, place tenderloin
pattie on the center, sprinkle with salt and pepper. Place a slice of
tomato on the pattie, season, and top with a slice of onion. Season.
Bring bacon ends up over onion slice and fasten with a wooden pick.
Place in a baking pan, cover and bake 30 minutes in a moderate oven
(350° F.) Remove cover and continue baking 30 minutes longer. 6
servings.


                            Candied Ham Loaf

    [Illustration: Ground ham and beef]




                               MENU IDEA
                            Candied Ham Loaf
                         Mashed Sweet Potatoes
                                  Peas
                          Cinnamon Apple Salad
                            Cloverleaf Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Lemon Fluff Pie
                                Beverage

  _2 pounds ground ham_
  _1 pound ground beef_
  _2 cups whole wheat bread crumbs_
  _1 cup milk_
  _2 eggs, slightly beaten_
  _1 teaspoon dry mustard_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _½ cup brown sugar_
  _½ teaspoon ground cloves_

Soak bread crumbs in milk. Add eggs. Combine ground ham, ground beef,
mustard, salt and bread mixture. Mix well. Mix together brown sugar and
cloves and spread in bottom of 5 × 9-inch loaf pan. Pack mixture in pan,
bake in moderate oven (350° F.) for 1½ hours. Turn upside down to serve.
10 to 12 servings.




                 Versatile Ground Meat Works Menu Magic


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Ground meat is the basis for a great variety of popular dishes. It’s a
top favorite, from savory sausage patties for a hearty breakfast to a
glamorous meat loaf for a festive dinner party. Whatever the menu, the
economy, simplicity of preparation and versatility in serving explain
the universal appeal of ground meat to homemakers.

Ground beef, veal, pork or lamb, or a combination of these, provides a
meat dish for every taste. With the meat as the foundation of the
recipe, other ingredients are often added to introduce flavor variety.

_SEASONINGS TO CHOOSE._ Basic proportions for the more common seasonings
are 1 teaspoon salt, ¼ teaspoon pepper and 2 to 4 tablespoons chopped
onion for each pound of meat. Sage, thyme, marjoram, cayenne pepper,
celery salt, Chili powder, curry powder, paprika, mustard, cloves and
nutmeg are some of the commonly used herbs and spices. When
experimenting with new combinations, it is advisable to use these
seasonings cautiously until the proportions which have the greatest
flavor appeal are discovered. A good rule to follow is ⅛ teaspoon per
pound of ground meat for the stronger seasonings, ¼ teaspoon per pound
of ground meat for the more mild seasonings.

_OTHER INGREDIENTS TO ADD._ Toasted or plain enriched white, whole wheat
or rye bread; cracker crumbs; and rolled oats, rice or other cereals may
be combined with the ground meat. Grated or mashed potatoes or carrots,
peas, and grated apple are also occasional ingredients. The proportion
of these foods added to the ground meat may vary but should be kept
relatively small for the best meat flavor. Enough liquid—milk, water,
vegetable juices, soup stock, canned or cooked tomatoes, tomato
catchup—will be needed to moisten the mixture, and egg is necessary to
hold the ingredients together.

_WAYS TO SERVE._ Meat loaves and meat balls are perhaps the most usual
ways in which ground meat mixtures are served. To add variety, the meat
mixture may be baked in large or individual ring molds, muffin pans, or
in various shapes for individual loaves. Potatoes, green peppers,
onions, egg plant and squash are a few of the vegetables that lend
themselves to a meat stuffing. Ground meat and vegetable combinations
are often prepared as fritters. Ground meat mixtures (principally meat
with herbs or spices for seasoning) appear on the menu as meat patties;
meat sauces for macaroni, spaghetti, noodles and rice; meat drumsticks;
fillings for meat pies or tarts; toppings for meat shortcakes, and as
favorite casserole dishes.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


                          Barbecued Pork Chops

    [Illustration: Rib Chops]




                               MENU IDEA
                          Barbecued Pork Chops
                             Buttered Rice
                                Broccoli
                             Cucumber Salad
                           Corn Meal Muffins
                          Butter or Margarine
                               Jelly Roll
                                Beverage

  _6 pork rib or loin chops, cut 1 inch thick_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _½ teaspoon pepper_
  _2 tablespoons flour_
  _2 tablespoons prepared mustard_
  _¼ cup chopped onion_
  _½ teaspoon ground cloves_
  _2 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce_
  _1 cup juice from apple, peach, bread and butter or sweet pickles_
  _1 cup catchup_

Brown chops in frying-pan. Season with salt and pepper. Mix flour and
mustard to make a smooth paste. Add remaining ingredients and blend
well. Pour mixture over chops, cover closely and cook slowly for 1 hour.
6 servings.


                     Smoked Ham Slice—Apricot Glaze

    [Illustration: Smoked ham slice]




                               MENU IDEA
                        Ham Slice-Apricot Glaze
                            Mashed Potatoes
                               Asparagus
                          Lettuce-Tomato Salad
                              Hot Biscuits
                          Butter or Margarine
                               Ice Cream
                                Brownies
                                Beverage

  _Smoked ham slice, cut 1 inch thick_
  _1 No. 303 can apricot halves_
  _½ teaspoon ground cloves_
  _¼ teaspoon allspice_
  _½ teaspoon cinnamon_

Drain apricots and save juice. Set regulator to broil. Place ham slice
on broiler rack and insert broiler rack and pan so the top surface of
the meat is 2 to 3 inches from the heat. Sprinkle with spices and broil
until nicely browned, about 10 minutes, basting occasionally with
apricot juice. Turn, sprinkle ham with remaining spices, continue
broiling, basting with apricot juice until done, about 10 minutes. Five
minutes before ham slice is done, arrange apricot halves, cut surface
down, on ham and continue broiling until ham is done and apricots are
lightly browned. Spoon basting liquid over ham and apricots before
serving. 4 to 6 servings.


                       RECIPES FOR PORK LEFTOVERS


                     Ham-Noodle-Mushroom Casserole

  _2 cups cubed cooked ham_
  _1 8-ounce package broad noodles_
  _Water_
  _1 3-ounce can mushrooms_
  _3 tablespoons butter or margarine_
  _¼ cup enriched flour_
  _2 cups milk (or milk and mushroom liquid)_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _½ teaspoon pepper_
  _1 tablespoon chopped pimiento_
  _1 tablespoon chopped parsley, if desired_

Cook noodles in boiling salted water until tender. Drain. Cook mushrooms
in butter or margarine until lightly browned. Remove mushrooms, add
flour and mix well. Add milk gradually and cook, stirring constantly
until thickened. Add salt, pepper, pimiento, parsley and ham. Arrange
the cooked noodles in a greased 1½-quart casserole. Add ham mixture,
arrange mushrooms on top. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) for 45
minutes. 6 to 8 servings.


                              Swiss Salad

  _2 cups cubed cooked pork_
  _1 cup cooked peas_
  _½ cup French dressing_
  _½ cup diced celery_
  _½ cup walnut meats, broken_
  _6 lettuce leaves_
  _Paprika_
  _Mayonnaise_
  _2 hard-cooked eggs_
  _6 stuffed olives_

Marinate meat and peas in French dressing and chill. Add celery and nuts
and arrange on lettuce leaves. Sprinkle with paprika and dot with
mayonnaise. Cut each egg into 6 slices. Remove egg yolk from egg slices.
Arrange the white rings around the salad. Cut each olive into 4 slices.
Overlap 2 olive slices inside each ring of egg white. Press the egg
yolks through a sieve and sprinkle over the salad. 4 to 6 servings.


                     Lamb Cuts and Cooking Methods

    [Illustration: Lamb Shoulder Chops]

ROAST: Rolled and cushion-style shoulder; crown roast; loin roast;
boneless sirloin; leg; breast and loaf.

BROIL: Shoulder, rib, loin and English chops; steaks; patties; liver and
kidneys.

PANBROIL: The same cuts as prepared by broiling. Cuts cooked by this
method are cut thinner than those cooked by broiling.

PANFRY: Shoulder chops; rib and loin chops; steaks; patties; liver and
kidneys.

BRAISE: Shoulder chops; breast; riblets; steaks; neck slices; shanks and
cubes.

COOK IN LIQUID: Neck; riblets; shanks; stew meat; hearts and kidneys.


                         Other Facts About Lamb

Lamb comes from a young animal and practically all cuts may be cooked by
roasting, broiling or panbroiling. These cuts may be served medium or
well done. Lamb neck, shanks and breasts should be braised or cooked in
liquid until well done. The “fell” or paper-like covering, should not be
removed from the leg of lamb because the leg, with “fell” on, will roast
in less time, hold its shape better and be juicier; the “fell” is
removed from chops and steaks. Lamb, at its best, should be served hot
or cold ... never lukewarm. Frozen lamb cuts may be stored at 0° F. or
lower, 6 to 9 months.




                             _Recipes for_ LAMB


    [Illustration: _Recipes for_ LAMB]


                           Broiled Lamb Chops

    [Illustration: Loin chops]




                               MENU IDEA
                           Broiled Lamb Chops
                            O’Brien Potatoes
                             Minted Carrots
                              Fruit Salad
                             Fan Tan Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                               Cherry Pie
                                Beverage

  _6 lamb rib, loin or shoulder chops, cut 1 to 2 inches thick_
  _Salt_
  _Pepper_

Set regulator to broil. Place chops on broiler rack. Insert broiler pan
and rack so the top of 1-inch chops is 2 inches from the heat and 2-inch
chops is 3 inches from the heat. When one side is browned, season, turn
and finish cooking on the second side. Season. Chops cut 1 inch thick
require 10 to 12 minutes. Chops cut 2 inches require 20 to 22 minutes. 6
servings.


                      Braised Boiled Lamb Shoulder

    [Illustration: Rolled shoulder]




                               MENU IDEA
                         Braised Lamb Shoulder
                           Parsleyed Potatoes
                              Creamed Peas
                            Perfection Salad
                           Parkerhouse Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                            Orange-Nut Cake
                                Beverage

  _3 to 4-pound rolled lamb shoulder_
  _1 teaspoon ground ginger_
  _1 teaspoon dry mustard_
  _½ teaspoon ground cloves_
  _1½ teaspoons salt_
  _3 tablespoons flour_
  _2 tablespoons melted lard or drippings_
  _¼ cup water_

Combine ginger, dry mustard, cloves, salt and flour. Dredge lamb
shoulder with seasoned flour, saving remaining mixture. Brown slowly on
all sides in lard or drippings. Add water. Cover closely and cook slowly
until meat is done, allowing 40 to 45 minutes per pound, or about 3
hours. Thicken drippings with remaining flour mixture for gravy.


                              Lamb Kabobs

    [Illustration: Lamb cubes]




                               MENU IDEA
                              Lamb Kabobs
                        Vegetables En Brochette
                            Mashed Potatoes
                            Perfection Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                          Deep Dish Apple Pie
                                Beverage

  _2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut in 1½ inch cubes_
  _½ cup salad oil_
  _2 tablespoons vinegar_
  _2 tablespoons lemon juice_
  _1 teaspoon dry mustard_
  _⅛ teaspoon thyme_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _½ cup chopped onion_
  _4 tomatoes_
  _2 medium green peppers_
  _1 can small whole onions_

Blend salad oil, vinegar, lemon juice, seasonings and chopped onion in
bowl. Add lamb cubes, let stand several hours, or over night, in the
refrigerator. Drain. Thread cubes of lamb on 8 skewers. Quarter
tomatoes, cut green peppers in 1-inch squares. Thread tomato wedges,
green pepper squares and whole onions on 8 remaining skewers. Brush with
marinating mixture. Place lamb kabobs on rack in broiler pan. Broil 3
inches from heat for 12 minutes. Turn. Place vegetable kabobs on broiler
rack. Broil additional 10 to 12 minutes or until meat and vegetables are
done. 6 servings.


                      Leg of Lamb—Puffy Mint Pears

    [Illustration: Frenched leg]




                                  MENU
                              Leg of Lamb
                            Browned Potatoes
                                  Peas
                            Puffy Mint Pears
                          Spinach-Radish Salad
                              Corn Sticks
                          Butter or Margarine
                        Lemon Refrigerator Cake
                                Beverage

  _5 to 6-pound leg of lamb_
  _Salt and pepper_
  _Puffy Mint Pears_

Do not have the fell removed from the leg of lamb. Season. Place skin
side down on rack in open roasting pan. Insert meat thermometer so the
bulb reaches the center of the thickest part of the leg, being sure the
bulb does not rest in fat or on bone. Do not add water. Do not cover.
Roast in a slow oven (300° F.) about 2½ to 3½ hours or until done. The
meat thermometer will register 175° F. for medium done; 180° F. for
well-done lamb. Allow 30 to 35 minutes per pound for roasting. Serve
with Puffy Mint Pears.


                            Puffy Mint Pears

  _1 No. 2½ can Bartlett pears_
  _1 3-ounce pkg. cream cheese_
  _¼ cup mint jelly_

Drain pears and place in baking dish, cut side up. Place a spoonful of
cream cheese in center of each pear half. Place in oven or under broiler
long enough for cream cheese to be lightly browned. Spoon mint jelly
around cheese on pears. Serve hot with lamb.


                           Fruited Lamb Chops

    [Illustration: Chops (arm and blade)]




                               MENU IDEA
                           Fruited Lamb Chops
                           Au Gratin Potatoes
                               Lima Beans
                           Molded Lime Salad
                          Butter or Margarine
                              Cream Puffs
                                Beverage

  _4 lamb arm or blade chops, cut ¾ to 1 inch thick_
  _2 tablespoons flour_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _⅛ teaspoon pepper_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _1 cup dried apricots_
  _1 cup pitted prunes_
  _¼ cup water_

Dredge lamb chops with seasoned flour and brown in lard or drippings.
Add apricots, prunes and water. Cover closely and cook slowly 45 minutes
to 1 hour or until chops are tender. 4 servings.


                           Oriental Lamb Stew

    [Illustration: Lamb for stew]




                               MENU IDEA
                           Oriental Lamb Stew
                              Green Beans
                             Boiled Onions
                           Orange-Prune Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Almond Cookies
                                Beverage

  _2 pounds boneless lamb for stew, cut in 1½-inch cubes_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _2 tablespoons chopped onion_
  _1 No. 2½ can tomatoes_
  _1 tablespoon curry or chili powder_
  _3 tablespoons flour_
  _½ cup water_
  _8 ripe or green olives_
  _⅛ teaspoon lemon juice_
  _Salt_
  _3 cups cooked rice_

Brown lamb in lard or drippings. Pour off drippings. Add onion, tomatoes
and curry or chili powder. Cover closely and cook slowly for 1½ hours or
until meat is tender. Thicken stew with flour added to ½ cup water. Just
before serving, add chopped olives, lemon juice and salt to taste. Serve
on hot rice. 6 to 8 servings.


                       RECIPES FOR LAMB LEFTOVERS


                             Shepherd’s Pie

  _2 cups diced cooked lamb_
  _1 cup chopped celery_
  _1 No. 303 can kidney beans_
  _1 cup diced cooked carrots_
  _1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _1½ cups thin gravy, or_
  _1½ cups water and 1 bouillon cube_
  _3 cups well-seasoned mashed potatoes_

Combine cooked lamb, celery, kidney beans, carrots, Worcestershire
sauce, salt and gravy or water to which bouillon cube has been added.
Pour into a l½-quart casserole. Spoon mashed potatoes to form a border
on meat mixture. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) 25 to 30 minutes, or
until mashed potatoes are lightly browned. 4 servings.


                     Lamb Pie with Catchup Biscuits

  _2 cups chopped cooked lamb_
  _2 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _2 tablespoons grated onion_
  _½ cup canned tomatoes_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _1 No. 303 can lima beans, drained_
  _2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted_
  _1 Recipe Biscuits (see p. 40)_
  _¼ cup catchup_

Brown lamb lightly in lard or drippings. Add onion, tomatoes,
seasonings, lima beans and butter or margarine. Pour into 1-quart
casserole. Make biscuit dough. Roll dough ½-inch thick, spread with
catchup and roll as jelly roll. Cut into 1-inch slices and place cut
side down over hot meat mixture. Bake in a hot oven (425° F.) 25 to 30
minutes, or until biscuits are done. 6 servings.


                            Lamb Croquettes

  _2 cups ground cooked lamb_
  _½ cup chopped walnuts_
  _½ cup mashed cooked carrots_
  _1 teaspoon onion juice_
  _1 teaspoon lemon juice_
  _⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper_
  _1½ teaspoons salt_
  _1 cup thick white sauce_
  _1 egg, slightly beaten_
  _2 tablespoons milk_
  _½ cup fine bread crumbs_
  _Lard for deep-fat frying_

Combine lamb, walnuts, carrots, onion and lemon juice, cayenne pepper,
salt and white sauce. Shape into croquettes and chill. Combine beaten
egg and milk. Roll croquettes in bread crumbs, dip in egg and milk and
again in bread crumbs. Fry in deep hot lard (360° F.) 2 to 3 minutes, or
until light brown. Drain. 4 to 6 servings.




        _Recipes for_ SAUSAGES, READY-TO-SERVE AND CANNED MEATS


    [Illustration: _Recipes for_ SAUSAGES, READY-TO-SERVE AND CANNED
    MEATS]


                    Sausage Links In Batter Pudding

    [Illustration: Sausage Links In Batter Pudding]




                               MENU IDEA
                              Fruit Juice
                    Sausage Links in Batter Pudding
                              Green Beans
                          Stuffed Tomato Salad
                           Strawberry Sundae
                            Angel Food Cake
                                Beverage

  _1 pound sausage links_
  _2 cups milk_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _½ cup corn meal_
  _4 eggs_

Heat milk in double boiler. Add salt and corn meal. Stir constantly and
cook 10 to 15 minutes, or until thickened. Cool slightly. Beat eggs and
add to mixture. Pour mixture into a well-greased 2-quart baking dish,
and place sausage links on top. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) for 40
to 45 minutes. 4 servings.


                     Frankfurter and Sauerkraut Pie

    [Illustration: Frankfurter and Sauerkraut Pie]




                                  MENU
                     Frankfurter and Sauerkraut Pie
                           Tomato-Onion Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Baked Custard
                                Beverage

  _8 frankfurters, cut in half crosswise_
  _3 cups seasoned mashed potatoes_
  _2 teaspoons minced onion_
  _1 No. 2 can sauerkraut_
  _½ teaspoon dill seed_

Combine seasoned mashed potatoes and onion and line bottom and sides of
a greased baking dish with mixture. Fill center with sauerkraut and
sprinkle with dill seed. Arrange frankfurters in pinwheel fashion on top
of sauerkraut. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) for 20 minutes. 4 to 6
servings.


                     Chipped Beef Potato Dumplings

    [Illustration: Chipped Beef Potato Dumplings]




                                  MENU
                     Chipped Beef Potato Dumplings
                                Broccoli
                            Perfection Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Daffodil Cake
                                Beverage

  _½ pound chipped beef_
  _¼ cup lard or drippings_
  _¼ cup flour_
  _1 13-ounce can evaporated milk_
  _1½ cups potato water_
  _¼ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce_
  _Pepper_
  _Potato Dumplings_

Brown chipped beef lightly in lard or drippings. Blend in flour and
gradually stir in evaporated milk, potato water and Worcestershire
sauce. Cook until thickened, stirring constantly. Season with pepper.
Serve over potato dumplings. 6 to 8 servings.


                            Potato Dumplings

  _4 medium potatoes, boiled_
  _½ cup sifted enriched flour_
  _½ teaspoon baking powder_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _¼ teaspoon pepper_
  _2 tablespoons grated onion_
  _½ cup dry bread crumbs_
  _1½ teaspoons melted butter or margarine_
  _1 egg, slightly beaten_
  _3 quarts boiling water_
  _½ teaspoon salt_

Rice potatoes. Sift together flour, baking powder, salt, and pepper.
Combine riced potatoes, flour mixture, onion, bread crumbs, butter or
margarine and egg. Mix well. Shape into 12 small balls and dredge
lightly with flour. Chill. Drop dumplings into boiling salted water.
Cover and boil for 15 minutes.


                       Southern Sausage Breakfast

    [Illustration: Southern Sausage Breakfast]




                                  MENU
                              Orange Juice
                       Southern Sausage Breakfast
                             Scrambled Eggs
                              Hot Biscuits
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Honey or Syrup
                                Beverage

  _1 pound bulk pork sausage_
  _½ cup currants_
  _3 cups boiling water_
  _¾ teaspoon salt_
  _½ cup corn meal_
  _Flour_

Add currants to boiling water. Cook 5 minutes. Add salt and corn meal,
stirring constantly. Cook until thickened. Pour mush into greased 5 ×
9-inch loaf pan. Chill.

Shape sausage into 6 patties. Brown patties slowly. Pour off drippings.
Cover, continue cooking slowly 20 minutes.

Slice mush ½ inch thick. Dredge slices in flour and brown in sausage
drippings. 4 servings.


                           Summer Salad Bowl

    [Illustration: Summer Salad Bowl]




                               MENU IDEA
                              Celery Soup
                           Summer Salad Bowl
                              Potato Chips
                                Relishes
                              French Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                             Chocolate Cake
                                Beverage

  _¼ pound summer sausage, cut in strips_
  _¼ pound bologna, cut in strips_
  _1 medium-size head lettuce_
  _1 tablespoon chopped onion_
  _2 tablespoons crumbled blue cheese_
  _5 slices bacon, chopped_
  _½ cup bacon drippings_
  _¼ cup vinegar_
  _½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce_

Break lettuce into pieces. Add summer sausage, bologna, onion and blue
cheese. Cook bacon until crisp, drain and save drippings. Mix bacon with
other ingredients. Add vinegar and Worcestershire sauce to ½ cup
drippings, heat and pour over salad just before serving. Toss lightly. 4
to 6 servings.


                           Fruited Ham Rolls

    [Illustration: Fruited Ham Rolls]




                                  MENU
                           Fruited Ham Rolls
                              Potato Balls
                               Asparagus
                          Carrot-Raisin Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                           Chocolate Pudding
                                Beverage

  _8 slices “boiled” ham, cut ⅛ inch thick_
  _1 cup chopped, dried apricots_
  _3 tablespoons butter or margarine_
  _3 tablespoons flour_
  _1 cup milk_
  _1½ cups cooked rice_
  _¼ teaspoon nutmeg_

Soak apricots until soft. Make a cream sauce as follows: melt butter or
margarine, add flour, stirring until blended. Add milk, cook, stirring
constantly, until thickened. Add apricots, rice and nutmeg to cream
sauce; mix well. Place about ¼ cup of rice mixture on each ham slice,
roll like jelly roll. Fasten with wooden picks. Place rolls in baking
dish, bake in moderate oven (350° F.) 20 minutes or until heated
through. 8 servings.


                     Smoky Sausage Spaghetti Sauce

    [Illustration: Smoky Sausage Spaghetti Sauce]




                                  Menu
                             Smoky Sausage
                            Spaghetti Sauce
                         Mixed Vegetable Salad
                          Garlic French Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                               Ice Cream
                                Beverage

  _1 pound smoked sausage links_
  _3 tablespoons lard or drippings_
  _½ cup minced onion_
  _1 green pepper, cut in thin strips_
  _½ pound fresh mushrooms or_
  _1 small can mushrooms_
  _12 stuffed olives, sliced_
  _¼ teaspoon garlic salt_
  _1 8-ounce can tomato sauce_
  _1 No. 2½ can tomatoes_
  _1 8-ounce package spaghetti_
  _Grated Parmesan cheese, if desired_

Slice sausage links diagonally in ½-inch pieces. Cook sausage, onion,
green pepper and mushrooms in lard or drippings until lightly browned.
Add olives, garlic salt, tomato sauce and tomatoes. Simmer at least 2
hours. Cook spaghetti in boiling salted water until tender. Rinse and
drain. Serve sauce over spaghetti and sprinkle with grated Parmesan
cheese, if desired. 4 to 6 servings.


                          Cherry Meat Muffins

    [Illustration: Cherry Meat Muffins]




                               MENU IDEA
                          Cherry Meat Muffins
                             Baked Potatoes
                               Asparagus
                           Head Lettuce Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                           Lemon Chiffon Cake
                                Beverage

  _1 12-ounce can luncheon meat, ground_
  _1 cup soft bread crumbs_
  _1 egg, well beaten_
  _2 tablespoons brown sugar_
  _1 teaspoon prepared mustard_

Combine ingredients in order given, mix thoroughly. Pack mixture into
medium-size muffin pans, filling each ⅔ full. Bake in slow oven (300°
F.) for 30 to 45 minutes. Serve with Cherry Sauce. 3 to 4 servings.


                              Cherry Sauce

  _1 tablespoon cornstarch_
  _¼ cup sugar_
  _1 cup cherry juice_
  _1 cup pitted red cherries_

Combine cornstarch, sugar and cherry juice. Cook over low heat, stirring
constantly until thick and clear. Add cherries and serve hot over meat
muffins.




                             _Recipes for_ VARIETY MEATS


    [Illustration: _Recipes for_ VARIETY MEATS]


                            Heart Andalouse

    [Illustration: Heart Andalouse]




                               MENU IDEA
                            Heart Andalouse
                             Rice and Peas
                           Tossed Green Salad
                              Salt Sticks
                          Butter or Margarine
                           Lemon Chiffon Pie
                                Beverage

  _1 pound beef or veal heart_
  _1 cup water_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _1 No. 1 can condensed tomato soup_
  _¼ pound cheddar cheese, grated_
  _1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce_
  _¼ cup flour_
  _½ cup milk_
  _2 cups hot cooked rice_
  _1 No. 303 can or 1 12-ounce package frozen peas, cooked_

Wash heart and remove hard parts. Cut in ¾-inch cubes. Add water and
salt. Cover closely, cook slowly 1½ hours. Add tomato soup, cheese and
Worcestershire sauce. Continue cooking until cheese is melted. Make a
paste of flour and milk and thicken heart mixture. Serve over rice and
peas. 6 servings.


                              Liver Rolls

    [Illustration: Liver Rolls]




                               MENU IDEA
                              Liver Rolls
                       Fried Potatoes and Onions
                          Stuffed Tomato Salad
                              French Bread
                          Butter or Margarine
                         Pineapple-Mint Sundae
                           Chocolate Brownies
                                Beverage

  _6 slices beef or pork liver, cut ¼-inch thick_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _½ teaspoon pepper_
  _⅛ teaspoon thyme_
  _6 pork sausage links_
  _1 tablespoon lard_
  _1 cup tomato sauce_

Trim membrane from liver, sprinkle with seasonings. Roll each slice with
a sausage link in center; fasten with a wooden pick. Brown slowly in
lard, pour off drippings. Add tomato sauce. Cover, simmer 30 to 45
minutes or until tender. 6 servings.


                         Smoked Tongue Rarebit

    [Illustration: Smoked Tongue Rarebit]




                               MENU IDEA
                         Smoked Tongue Rarebit
                              Boiled Rice
                             Buttered Peas
                          Cucumber-Onion Salad
                               Hard Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                          Southern Marble Cake
                                Beverage

  _10 to 12 slices cooked smoked tongue or 1 9-ounce can smoked tongue_
  _2 tablespoons butter or margarine_
  _2 tablespoons flour_
  _¼ teaspoon paprika_
  _¼ teaspoon dry mustard_
  _1 cup milk_
  _1 cup grated cheddar cheese_
  _½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce_

Cut tongue into thin strips, about 3 inches long. Melt butter or
margarine. Stir in flour, paprika and mustard. Add milk, cook, stirring
constantly until thickened. Add cheese and cook very slowly until
melted. Add Worcestershire sauce and fold in tongue pieces. Serve over
rice, if desired. 4 to 6 servings.


            Sweetbreads—Canadian-Style Bacon—Pineapple Grill

    [Illustration: Sweetbread Grill]




                               MENU IDEA
                            Sweetbread Grill
                            Mashed Potatoes
                              Green Beans
                         Tomato-Cucumber Salad
                            Cloverleaf Rolls
                          Butter or Margarine
                          Chocolate Fudge Cake
                                Beverage

  _1 pound sweetbreads_
  _1 quart water_
  _1 teaspoon salt_
  _1 tablespoon vinegar or lemon juice_
  _6 slices Canadian-style bacon cut ¼-inch thick_
  _6 pineapple slices_
  _2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted_

Wash sweetbreads. Add water, salt and vinegar or lemon juice. Simmer 20
minutes. Drain. Remove membrane and divide sweetbreads into 6 servings.
Place Canadian-style bacon slices and pineapple on broiler rack. Insert
broiler pan and rack so the surface of the meat and pineapple is about 3
inches from the heat. Broil 4 minutes, turn meat and pineapple. Arrange
a slice of Canadian-style bacon on each pineapple slice and top with
sweetbreads. Brush sweetbreads with butter or margarine. Continue
broiling 3 to 4 minutes or until lightly browned. 6 servings.




                        Time-Table for Roasting


          ROAST           Weight      Oven           Interior       Approximate
                         _Pounds_  Temperature   Temperature When    Time Per
                                    Constant    Removed From Oven      Pound
                                  _Degrees F._     _Degrees F._      _Minutes_
  BEEF

    Standing ribs          6-8         300             140             18-20
                                                       160             22-25
                                                       170             27-30
    Standing rib (t rib)    2          300             140              33
                                                       160              45
                                                       170              50
    Rolled rib             5-7         300             140              32
                                                       160              38
                                                       170              48
    Standing rump (high    5-7         300           150-170           25-30
    quality)
    Rolled rump (high      4-6         300           150-170           25-30
    quality)

  PORK—FRESH

    Loin—Center            3-5         350             185             35-40
    Half                   5-7                         185             40-45
    Ends                   2-3                         185             45-50
    Picnic shoulder        4-6         350             185             30-35
       Boned and rolled    3-5         350             185             40-45
       Cushion-style       3-5         350             185             35-40
    Boston butt            4-6         350             185             45-50
    Fresh ham, whole      10-12        350             185             30-35

  PORK—SMOKED

    Ham[1]—Whole          10-14        300             160             18-20
    Half                   5-7         300             160             22-25
    Butt                   3-4         300             160             40-45
    Shoulder butt          2-4         300             170              35
    Picnic shoulder        5-7         300             170              35

  LAMB

    Leg                    5-8         300           175-180           30-35
    Shoulder (bone in)     4-6         300           175-180           30-35
       Rolled              3-5         300           175-180           40-45
       Cushion-style       3-5         300           175-180           30-35

  VEAL

    Leg                    5-8         300             170             25-35
    Loin                   4-6         300             170             30-35
    Rib (rack)             3-5         300             170             30-35
    Shoulder (bone in)     5-8         300             170             25-35
       Rolled              4-6         300             170             40-45

[1]Hams now on market which require shorter cooking period due to method
    of processing




                       Time-Table for Broiling[2]


                                                    Approximate Total
                                                      Cooking Time
               CUT                   Weight         Rare         Medium
                                    _Pounds_      _Minutes_    _Minutes_
  BEEF

    Chuck steak—1 inch                 2⅓            24            30
         1½ inches                     4             40            45
    Rib steak—1 inch                   1½            15            20
         1½ inches                     2             25            30
         2 inches                      2¼            35            45
    Club steak—1 inch                  1             15            20
         1½ inches                     1¼            25            30
         2 inches                      1½            35            45
    Sirloin steak—1 inch               3             20            25
         1½ inches                     4¼            30            35
         2 inches                      5¾            40            45
    Porterhouse steak—1 inch           2             20            25
         1½ inches                     2½            30            35
         2 inches                      3             40            45
    Ground beef patties
         1 inch thick by 3          4 ounces         15            25
      inches

  LAMB

    Shoulder chops—1 inch           3 ounces     Lamb chops        12
                                                   are not
                                                 served rare
         1½ inches                  6 ounces                       18
         2 inches                  10 ounces                       22
    Rib Chops—1 inch                2 ounces                       12
         1½ inches                  4 ounces                       18
         2 inches                   5 ounces                       22
    Loin chops—1 inch               3 ounces                       12
         1½ inches                  5 ounces                       18
         2 inches                   6 ounces                       22
    Ground lamb patties
         1 inch by 3 inches         4 ounces                       18

  PORK

    Ham slice—tendered
         ½ inch                       ¾-1        Ham always      10-12
                                                 cooked well
                                                    done
         1 inch                       1½-2                       16-20
    Canadian-style bacon
         ¼ inch slices                                            6-8
         ½ inch slices                                            8-10
      Bacon                                                       4-5

[2]This time-table is based on broiling at a moderate temperature (350°
    F.). Rare steaks are broiled to an internal temperature of 140° F.;
    medium to 160° F. Lamb chops are broiled to 170° F. Ham is cooked
    well done. The time for broiling bacon is influenced by personal
    preference as to crispness.




                        Time-Table for Braising


           CUT             Average Weight or        Approximate
                               Thickness           Total Cooking
                                                       Time
  BEEF

    Pot-Roast           3-5 pounds               3-4 hours
    Swiss steak         1½-2½ inches             2-3 hours
    Fricassee           2 inch cubes             1½-2½ hours
    Beef birds          ½ inch (× 2 in. × 4 in.) 1½-2½ hours
    Short ribs          Pieces (2 in. × 2 in. ×  1½-2½ hours
                        4 in.)
    Round steak         ¾ inch                   45-60 minutes
    Stuffed steak       ½-¾ inch                 1½ hours

  PORK

    Chops               ¾-1½ inches              45-60 minutes
    Spareribs           2-3 pounds               1½ hours
    Tenderloin
       Whole            ¾-1 pound                45-60 minutes
       Fillets          ½ inch                   30 minutes
    Shoulder steak      ¾ inch                   45-60 minutes

  LAMB

    Breast—stuffed      2-3 pounds               1½-2 hours
    Breast—rolled       1½-2 pounds              1½-2 hours
    Neck slices         ¾ inch                   1 hour
    Shanks              ½ pound each             1-1½ hours
    Shoulder chops      1 inch                   45-60 minutes

  VEAL

    Breast—stuffed      3-4 pounds               1½-2½ hours
    Breast—rolled       2-3 pounds               1½-2½ hours
    Birds               ½ inch (× 2 in. × 4 in.) 45-60 minutes
    Chops               ½-¾ inch                 45-60 minutes
    Steak or cutlets    ½-¾ inch                 45-60 minutes
    Shoulder chops      ½-¾ inch                 45-60 minutes
    Shoulder cubes      1-2 inches               45-60 minutes




                    Time-Table for Cooking in Liquid


             CUT              Average   Approximate  Approximate
                               Weight     Time Per      Total
                              _Pounds_     Pound     Cooking Time
                                         _Minutes_     _Hours_

  Smoked ham (old style and country cured)
    Large                      12-14         20
    Small                      10-12         25
    Half                        6-8          30
  Smoked ham (tendered)
    Shank or butt half          5-8        20-25
  Smoked picnic shoulder        4-8          45
  Fresh or corned beef          4-6        40-50
  Beef for stew                                         2½-3½
  Veal for stew                                          2-3
  Lamb for stew                                          1½-2




                             _Recipes for_ BAKED GOODS


    [Illustration: _Recipes for_ BAKED GOODS]


                           Pumpkin Pecan Pie

  _1 unbaked 9-inch pie crust_ (_See recipe below._)
  _3 tablespoons sugar_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _1 teaspoon cinnamon_
  _½ teaspoon ground ginger_
  _½ teaspoon nutmeg_
  _1 No. 303 can or 2 cups canned pumpkin_
  _⅔ cup brown sugar_
  _2 eggs, beaten_
  _1 cup evaporated milk_
  _½ cup water_

Mix sugar, salt and spices well. Combine pumpkin, brown sugar, eggs and
spice mixture. Scald evaporated milk and water. Add scalded milk,
stirring until evenly blended. Pour into unbaked pie crust and bake in a
hot oven (425° F.) 40 minutes. Sprinkle with Pecan Topping. Return to
oven and bake 10 minutes longer or until pie is glazed.


                             Pecan Topping

  _2 tablespoons butter or margarine_
  _¼ cup brown sugar_
  _1 tablespoon grated orange rind_
  _¾ cup whole pecans_

Combine butter or margarine, brown sugar, grated orange rind and whole
pecans.


                            Single Pie Crust

                      (_8 or 9-inch Single Pie Crust_)
  _1 cup sifted enriched flour_
  _¾ teaspoon salt_
  _4 to 6 tablespoons lard_
  _2 to 4 tablespoons cold water_

Add salt to flour. Cut lard into flour until crumbs are about size of
small peas. Add cold water, a little at a time, mixing quickly and
evenly through flour with a fork until dough just holds in a ball. Use
as little water as possible. Roll to about ⅛ inch in thickness. Line pie
pan. Bake according to directions in recipe. For baked crust prick
bottom of shell with a fork before baking. Bake in hot oven (450° F.) 8
to 10 minutes.


                            Orange-Nut Cake

  _1 cup raisins_
  _1 large orange_
  _1¾ cups sifted enriched flour_
  _1 teaspoon baking soda_
  _¼ teaspoon salt_
  _½ cup lard_
  _1 cup sugar_
  _2 eggs_
  _¾ cup sour milk_
  _½ cup chopped walnuts_

Line two 8-inch cake pans with waxed paper. Grind raisins and seeded
orange with fine blade of food grinder. Sift flour, baking soda and salt
together. Cream lard with sugar until light and fluffy. Add eggs, one at
a time, beating well after each addition. Add flour mixture alternately
with sour milk, mixing thoroughly after each addition. Add raisins,
oranges and chopped nuts. Pour batter into pans and bake in a moderate
oven (375° F.) for 30 minutes. Cool and frost with Uncooked Penuche
Frosting.


                       Uncooked Penuche Frosting

  _¼ cup butter or margarine_
  _6 tablespoons brown sugar_
  _2 cups sifted confectioners’ sugar_
  _3 tablespoons cream or top milk_
  _1 teaspoon vanilla_

Cream butter or margarine with brown sugar until light and fluffy. Add
confectioners’ sugar and continue creaming. Add cream and vanilla and
beat until frosting is light and fluffy.


                             Date-Nut Drops

  _1½ cups sifted enriched flour_
  _½ teaspoon baking soda_
  _¾ teaspoon baking powder_
  _½ teaspoon salt_
  _1 teaspoon cinnamon_
  _½ teaspoon ground cloves_
  _½ cup lard_
  _1 cup brown sugar_
  _¼ cup milk_
  _1 egg_
  _¼ pound pitted dates, chopped_
  _½ cup chopped walnuts_

Sift together 1¼ cups flour, baking soda, baking powder, salt, cinnamon
and cloves. Mix remaining ¼ cup flour with chopped dates. Cream lard
with brown sugar until light and fluffy. Add egg and mix well. Add
sifted dry ingredients alternately with milk to creamed mixture. Stir in
floured dates and nuts. Drop by teaspoonfuls on greased cooky sheets.
Bake in a moderate oven (375° F.) for 10 to 15 minutes. Yield: 3 dozen.


                                Biscuits

  _2 cups sifted enriched flour_
  _1 tablespoon baking powder_
  _¾ teaspoon salt_
  _4 to 6 tablespoons lard_
  _⅓ to ½ cup milk_

Sift together flour, baking powder and salt. Cut in lard until mixture
has fine even crumb. Add enough milk to make a soft dough. Turn onto a
lightly floured surface and knead gently for ½ minute. Pat or roll ½
inch thick and cut with a medium-sized biscuit cutter, dipped in flour.
Place on baking sheet and bake in a hot oven (450° F.) for 12 to 15
minutes. Yield: 10 to 12 biscuits.


                          Homemade Pastry Mix

  _7 cups sifted enriched flour_
  _4 teaspoons salt_
  _1¾ cups lard for soft wheat flour or 2 cups for hard wheat flour_

Add salt to flour. Cut lard into flour and salt with a fork or pastry
blender until the crumbs are about the size of small peas. Cover, store
in refrigerator until ready to use. Mixture will keep at least a month
in refrigerator. Yield: 8 single pie crusts. For single pie crust, add 2
to 4 tablespoons cold water to 1½ cups Homemade Pastry Mix, and for
double pie crust 4 to 6 tablespoons cold water to 2 cups Homemade Pastry
Mix.


                          Southern Marble Cake

  _2 cups sifted enriched flour_
  _2 teaspoons baking powder_
  _¼ teaspoon salt_
  _½ cup lard_
  _1 cup sugar_
  _2 eggs, beaten_
  _½ cup milk_
  _1 teaspoon vanilla_
  _1 teaspoon cinnamon_
  _¼ teaspoon cloves_
  _½ teaspoon nutmeg_
  _2 tablespoons molasses_

Sift flour, baking powder and salt together. Cream lard with sugar until
light and fluffy. Add beaten eggs. Add sifted dry ingredients
alternately with milk. Add vanilla. Divide batter into 2 parts, adding
spices and molasses to 1 part. Spoon light and dark mixtures alternately
into a greased 5 × 9-inch loaf pan. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) 50
to 60 minutes.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Let's Cook Meat, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LET'S COOK MEAT ***

***** This file should be named 62804-0.txt or 62804-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/8/0/62804/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

